# 25 Years of Leadership in Consumer Retail

by #InPractise 

### What happens when you move from managing things and people, into leading people?

That’s a tough question and I’ll try and use a couple of analogies or metaphors, to describe the change that I went through and how I came to terms with behaving and operating in a different way. The first one is a simple statement – leaders do right things; managers do things right. With leadership, you are looking at issues, such as vision, direction, overall positioning. Whereas management is more about the techniques and the processes, to get you from A to B. I think, probably, well described by Covey, when he talks about vision, in the context of a jungle, and fighting and battling your way through a jungle.

The managers are putting on machete-wielding training programs, to increase bulk and muscle, so that the machete wielders can hack their way through more undergrowth, every day. There are eating programs going on, to make sure we don’t get tired. There are sleeping programs, there are tents being erected. But the leader gets in a helicopter, gets up to the top of the forest, comes back down and says, hey guys, we’re in the bloody wrong forest.

Another simple analogy is, you’ve got a ladder and you put it up against a wall. A manager’s job, as I see it, is to make sure we get up the rungs of the ladder in the most efficient, most effective way we possibly can. The leader’s job is to make sure that the ladder is up against the right wall, in the first place. That’s the best couple of ways I can articulate the difference.

Leadership is about vision and direction. Management is about oiling the wheels, developing systems and processes, to enable us to get in the direction that the leader or visionary, has created.

### What did it mean for you, to move into a position, in your first experience?

Uncomfortable, for a long time. I would argue that you never make the full transition. The reason you got promoted is because you’re very, very good at doing the management job. In my sphere, of buying ranges, I was very good at spotting opportunities to sell a six pack, rather than a four pack, or set the price at 90p and not 80p, or deal with X supplier and not Y supplier. I’d learned those skills. That’s what got me promoted. The majority of time, that’s what gets people promoted.

The ability to spot talent, who can operate at the next level, is a key leadership criterion. Interestingly, when I was being interviewed and then got offered a role at Sainsbury’s, in 2005, the head hunter, said to me, I think you’ve got more credentials to be a CEO, than you have a commercial director, because you think differently. I’m not trying to blow smoke up my own backside here, but that was a bit of a moment of realization for me.

Different people spot different characteristics, abilities, strengths, weaknesses, as you move forward. It’s a learning process, and there is still the desire, within anybody that’s come through a certain organization and been promoted, internally, to dive back into the detail and to think, I can do that job better that they can do it. But resisting that temptation and helping somebody develop and learn their own style, is a key leadership criterion.

I once went to a presentation that Allan Leighton gave and he described it as, hold tight, let go. Ensure that the organization and the people are managing the business, on a day to day basis. Have an understanding that you can do that job and did that job and you can hold really, really tight to the reins. But at the same time, you let go and allow them to do what they need to do. Just ask them the odd question, here and there. How’s it going? You walk up to the vegetable buyer’s desk – what’s happened to the price of peas this month? I believe it’s the September chip contract time; what’s happening to the price of chips? Without making them feel as if you are trying to do their job for them, you give them the confidence that you are around and in the business.

The desire to get your hands on the day job, particularly when it’s not going quite as well as it needs to, is a real challenge. I might use a few metaphors during this conversation. There’s always a danger in metaphors. There’s a lot of war metaphors used about leadership and I’m completely anti-war, but I’m heavily into sport and sporting metaphors, although I know that people get turned off by sport metaphors, as well. But I often think about the leaders of football teams. I think about the characteristics of a guy called Martin O’Neill, who used to run up and down the touchline, wanting to take every penalty, every corner, save every goal, kick every ball, compared to Pep Guardiola, who sits there, even when his team is two or three nil, down, very calm, with his suit on and behaves in a very, very different way and leads in a very, very different way.

Everybody has to develop their own unique style. But I would say, that it’s about holding tight, letting go. I envisage leadership as, not out front, leading the agenda. I envisage the direction being set from behind, like a shepherd leads from behind the flock, allowing the most nimble sheep, or individuals, to move on, find their own way and bring the rest of the sheep alongside. All the time, the shepherd is at the back, setting the direction, but making sure that the outliers are being brought more into line, if they’re being particularly challenging or drifting off into very uncharted territory and, maybe, the wrong direction. All of those are thoughts and ideas, around the transition, which is a tough one.

### In this specific situation of coming into a new environment, as a leader, it looks as if the inner characteristics that you relied on, were really an ability to listen, a degree of humility in the face of the unknown and an ability to actually trust your team?

Absolutely. I’ve shared some of the literature that I’ve learned, read, taught, studied, over the 30 years or so of my career, since the early nineties. One of those books was The First 90 Days. You’ve joined a new business, you’ve got a new job, you’re in a different function. What processes can you put in place, what questions do you need to ask? Are you facing a turnaround scenario? Are you facing a, we’re doing really, really well and we just need to continue, situation? What is the situation? Who are you dealing with? I literally took my team, the guys that were in the defense business already, and took them through that process. It was quite painful for some of them, because they kept saying, hang on a minute, we’re doing really well here. We’re the most profitable function in the business, we’ve got 250 million turnover, with an 8% EBIT, why are you asking us all these questions?

I said, well, firstly, maybe you’re going to learn some more and, secondly, I’m learning, because I’ve got to lead. Then, of course, we had the asbestos issue. Then we had the Buckingham Palace guardrooms issue. All of a sudden, a few pennies started to drop with those guys. It’s important to have frameworks and tools that you can quickly access and you understand and you can articulate to others, because they are the way you think; they’re a habit.

Habit, for me, is the intersection of three things. It’s the attitude – do I want to be able to learn to do this? Do I have the knowledge and do I have the skill? With anything, if you can develop those three things, then you have the habits. Habits form; bad habits form and, hopefully, good habits form. They become the process by which you assess the situation, hopefully ahead of time. It’s how you recover from it and the situation that replaces it and the processes that are in place to make sure that it doesn’t become destabilizing or the business going into complete meltdown, which is a question of risk management and judgment, which comes from habits and comes from experience.

### Moving to your experience at Asda.Could you give us the context for your experiences as a leader, coming into that business?

I was, effectively, given most of the fresh food categories; a significant chunk of the food business, to run and manage. The business was under-performing. At the point, the discounters had about a five share, and were growing and were challenging the norm.

In my first few days in the business, I stumbled upon a paper that had been written by Archie Norman, in the mid-90s, called Value Retailing. It was about five or six pages. His key platform was, we are a value retailer. We are a northern value retailer, who sells basic products – we’ve got some wider ranges – and we sell things that people buy, every day. We have to price competitive on those items, because if we’re not, people will shop elsewhere. For years, Asda had the price position in the market. But clearly, the discounters had come in and were now starting to challenge that and it had got to about 5%. Remember, this was 2010.

I read this statement and the premise of his thinking was, dead simple, everyday low price, cut promotions out. Promotions create a lot of noise in the business, they create a lot of issues in the supply chain, a lot of cost gets driven in, because you’re managing peaks and troughs of volume. Suppliers are having that and they cost that in. They get left with a load of stock, because you don’t want it anymore, because customers haven’t bought into it, to the extent we thought they were going to buy into it. So EDLP is the route to go. Drive down prices, drive up volume. Drive up volume, quid pro quo, drive down costs. Drive down costs, create war chests, reinvest in service proposition number one and more price reductions. It’s a virtuous circle.

That was his premise. That’s what saved the business and that’s why, in my view, Walmart bought into it, in 1999. It was more EDLP than Walmart believes they are. Walmart’s mantra is, save money, live better. I sent my team out and said, we’re struggling; what’s going wrong Volumes are falling. We are under performing in loads of big contracts, where we have got volume rebates with suppliers or we’ve committed to a certain volume. The one that I can clearly remember, is milk. We had committed to 400 million liters a year, with Arla and we were tracking at about 340 million liters. I sent the team out and said, come back to me with the five top volume items, in your category and tell me what the price position is, versus Aldi and Iceland.

20% to 25% price gap. No wonder volumes are going down. What was being done? I’d been in the job six weeks and I thought, do you know what, I’m not going to carry the burden of this issue. I’m going to get it out on the table, I’m going to tell the business what I think they need to do. It’s linked back to the German’s (Aldi and [[Lidl]]'s) value proposition. It’s linked back to everything that I’m being told by Walmart and this is what we need to do.

The board backed me and we spent 250 million on price. Within two months, we’d stopped the leakage to Aldi.

The milk, we dropped the price from £1.48 to a £1. It cost us about £100 million to make that decision, but it was the right decision and Walmart supported it. We spent the next three years on a momentum and growth curve, that was just so inspiring. I’d spent a lot of time talking to my team, setting this direction around price and setting the direction around the fact that we’d get position on price, it would give us license to do NPD (New Produt Development), to drive up the margins, to enhance the product and make it extra special.

We had an off-site day, where I structured the whole day around the principles of good to great. Level five leadership, no ego, humble, getting the right people on the bus, in the right seats, with the message that said, I don’t need to motivate well-motivated people. You’re all well-motivated people. The only thing I can do to you, is piss you off and demotivate you, by my behavior. You know what we need to do. You get on and deliver it and I’ll just keep checking and balancing. I’ll keep doing all the stuff we’ve already talked about, such as questioning, setting the agenda. Never be complacent. Never accept what’s good – good is not great. Keep things simple in all diagrams, structures. I’ll talk a little bit about seven habits, in a minute, because that’s the anchor for me.

I go through the process of seven habits, on a daily basis. I quickly whizz through the seven. Am I behaving like that? Am I doing that, in my interactions? I introduced that, as a concept. I would send out little notes to people saying, have a read of this. What does it mean to you, that humility and legacy? I had a boss, Barry Williams, who’d been my colleague when I joined the business and then became my boss, in 2012. We shared the same view and the vision about what was going to make Asda successful. At the end of 2013, we hit 17.5 \[percent\] market share; the highest Asda has ever had. That’s a value share. The volume share would have been even greater. But going into 2014, it became clear that there was a different agenda going to be set. Walmart were clearly looking at the profitability of Asda, the potential growth, the margin recovery, versus other opportunities around the world. The pressure was coming on US comps, which was, effectively, what set the Walmart share price. Asda was 8% of the turnover, buried away in the UK. They’d sucked a load of learning out. There was a massive drive to get to 1.1 billion EBIT, for 2015, in the plans. For me, it just went completely against everything that I believed Asda should be doing. It was a massive challenge for me, personally.

I’d go into these meetings, with the exec and the board and my colleagues, saying this mad. We are going to lose customers. How can that be the right strategy? In the November of 2014, they took a load of hours out of the stores, changed the management structures, completely derailed all the key metrics in the business of service availability; queues went up. Availability went down. I said, we’ve got to change something. I agreed, with Barry, to go on a major investment plan, of 250 million, from January 2015.

Barry and I thought we’d got the support of the board, so we just went for it. I closed the price gap, overnight, to Aldi, from about 15%, 16%, down to about 7%. Immediately, within two weeks, the volume started going up. But we missed the Q1 profit forecast, by about £10 million. All the finance guys came out of the woodwork. All the Doubting Thomases came out of the woodwork and I had to stand up, at the beginning of 2015, in the company year beginning meeting and talk to 500 people about what I’d done what I’d done and what I believed. I came off the stage and I went over to Barry and said, I’m going to be gone by the middle of the year, because I can’t stand up there and say what I’ve just said, and then not follow through on it and the business isn’t going to back me, I know that.

He made a structure change. He called me in on the Monday, about five years ago, and he said, I need to make these changes. I need you on board. You are important to me, to sell this into the business. I went home that night and, for the rest of the week, I agonized and agonized over it. The mistake I made, I accepted it to start with and then I realized I shouldn’t have. After he’d announced it, then I backtracked, which was a mistake. But I backtracked on the Friday morning and I left by Friday lunchtime.

### What principles were you drawing on, to make that decision, in terms of the backtracking, which seems to have been in line with your character, with your values?

I knew that my head was ticking in, but I needed to trust my heart. I needed to go with what I really, really believed. I could see why Walmart were doing what they were doing. Margins are tight; the market is ridiculously competitive, the discounters have got a foothold.

I left Asda, in May 2015. By the January, Barry Williams, marketing director, who is now running Poundland and doing a really good job of it, Gavin Chappell, supply chain director, Fiona Lambert, director of George, Ian Stansfield, logistics director, the whole of the board and the trading team was totally different. Comps, for the first half of Q1 were negative eight. Andy Clarke went in June 2016. Asda was in turmoil.

You could look at it and say, I precipitated that turmoil, which I’m not necessarily proud of, but it smacked of a business that had just lost its way and wasn’t, effectively, managing Walmart and had made a lot of bad decisions. We sit now, five years later, with the discounters having grown three times. Asda made 1.1 billion, in 2015, but they now struggle to make 700 million.

My point is, if we’d invested that 300 million that I was suggesting we needed to invest, in 2015, we’d have still only made 700 million then, but the business would have been on a far different trajectory. Who knows? What lessons have I learned from that? I scribbled down a few things about my learnings through that process. For me, it’s all about trying to keep things in balance. As I’ve already said, my impulsiveness can, sometimes, tip the balance and I need to check myself back.

Here’s an excerpt from a book, by Tom Peters, that I always go back to, for leaders. “This great thing, is the first word I’m going to use, can breed a monster, if not controlled and not balanced. Confidence can breed a sense of infallibility. Quickness can lead to overhastiness. Sharp wit can lead to abrasiveness. Alertness can lead to a narrow focus. Dedication can lead to workaholism. Control can lead to inflexibility. Courage can lead to foolhardiness. Perseverance can lead to resistance to change. Charm can lead to manipulation. Thriftiness can lead to false economy. Commitment can lead to blind faith.”

Constantly keeping a balance and a check on yourself, not taking yourself too seriously, minimizing your ego. There’s got to be an element of ego in there, whether it’s charisma, self-confidence – to some people, self-confidence can be a huge ego. There has to be, again, a balance and a check on all of those things.

### What I’d say is, it’s really interesting to understand what you have drawn on, throughout your career, to face uncertainty, to be able to bring this vulnerability to the table, that allows you to reach people, that allows you to learn fast, that allows you to take in information, to make space for others. What have you fallen back on? What have you learned, over the years?

I fall back on, and I mentioned it earlier, the story of the seven habits of highly-effective people. During one of my interview processes, for a more senior role, within Iceland, in 1997, I was interviewed by Malcolm Walker’s exec coach, a guy called Peter Lee, as part of the panel. I didn’t get the job, but I got it a year later. He said to me, go away and read a book called The 7 Habits of Highly-Effective People. At that point, I’d never really picked up anything like that, in my career. Within six months of reading that book, I’d cancelled my wedding, which was six weeks away from happening, because I realized I was going down a path that I didn’t really want to be in; couldn’t face up to it. I met my now wife, Rachel. I sort of knew her at the time, but I realized that she was the person I wanted to be with. That was a fairly significant life-changing impact. But I got myself so imbued in that book, in the learnings of Covey and the style of Covey and what it taught me.

The first habit is proactivity. Take responsibility for your life. We are human beings. We’re not animals. We have a distinct advantage over animals, in that between stimulus and response, our ability to choose our response. That led me to Frankl and Man’s Search for Meaning. I read Frankl and it was just like, oh my god. If that guy can have that much vision – it makes me quite emotional, just thinking about it, to be honest – and that much personal responsibility and clarity of thinking, when he’s been in a concentration camp, starved and tortured for three years, anybody can do it. Anybody can do it.

That’s what I always fall back on. I fall back on, take responsibility for everything that happens to you in your life. The whole world is dominated by people who will tell you that you can’t do it. The headlines of the newspapers are constantly preying on those fears. VAT is going to go up next month. Rail fares are going up. It’s going to rain next week. The government has lost control. We haven’t got enough PPE. It’s constantly dominated by headlines that prey on people’s fears that somebody else is to blame. It’s not my fault. It’s not my issue. It’s not my responsibility to fix this situation.

Whereas Covey subscribes to the position that says, everything is in your control. But you have two circles. You have a circle of concern and a circle of influence. People who worry about things that they can do nothing about, play in their circle of concern. People who focus on the things they can influence, play in their circle of influence. What happens – and this is probably what happened to me, over time – is that your circle of influence grows, because you’re spending more time in it and you’re focusing on the things that you can do something about. Eventually, things that were once in your circle of concern, are now in your circle of influence, because you are growing your responsibility and you are growing yourself, as an individual and you are impacting more people. Proactivity, first habit.

Second habit. Begin with the end in mind; have a vision. The whole leadership habit. Where am I bloody going with myself? Until you know where you are going, with yourself, how can you lead an organization? You have to work out what it is that you stand for and what the end of your life looks like. The example he uses, you may have heard it, he goes into a church, it’s a funeral, there’s somebody in the coffin and there’s this great sense that this dead person added tremendous value to the whole of society, to business, to his friendships, to his family, to everything else. You look in the coffin and it’s you and you’ve got four people who can speak about you. Somebody from your close family, a friend, somebody from a work environment or somebody from a sports club, spiritual group or something that you’ve done for the society. What do you want them to say? Write it down. I struggled, for about 10 years, to write it down. Then I was at a conference, with Sodexo, in Paris and one of key note speakers stood up and he did a really good speech on the future and how to anticipate and all this sort of stuff. Then he read this poem out, at the end, called Successful Life and I thought, that’s it. I was scribbling it down, but he didn’t say where he’d got it from.

I shot off, to the front of the stage, and managed to drag his assistant out and said, what was that poem? Who wrote it? He said, it’s called Successful Life, written by Bessie Stanley, in the early 1900s. I got a copy and I’ve given it to, literally, hundreds of people, in my career, since then. Almost the first time I sit down with anybody, they’ll say to me, what do you want, what’s on your mind? I go, let’s not have this conversation. How do you feel about the world? What are your biggest challenges? What questions are you asking yourself? As I leave, I say, why don’t you have a read of that, because that’s what’s important to. It’s amazing, the reaction you get. He’s given me a piece of paper, with a bloody poem on it. What the hell’s going on here? Have a vision, that’s the second habit.

Third habit. Ruthlessly prioritize around that vision. Take responsibility, have a vision, and then prioritize your life around it and cut the noise out. Focus on things that are not urgent, but are very important. Almost every day, write them in the box. What do I need to focus on, today, that is not urgent, but it’s important? If you spend your time in that box, it’s long-term planning. It’s relationship building. It’s planting the seeds, to grow a harvest in six months’ time. It’s long-term education. There are no quick fixes in life. Everything takes time. But the urgent and important box is important, because it’s the ringing fire alarm. If the fire alarm is going off, you have to get out of the building, now. Forget everything else. Not urgent and important is the fire safety drill and the risk analysis, to make sure that the fire never happens in the first place.

Too many people, particularly in a fast-moving environment, spend all their time in the urgent and important. They think they’re busy. I used to work with a technical guy, who was the best technical guy in the world, but he had a real problem. He was so dedicated, but he’d spend his life driving up and down the M1, going to the factory, to sort out the quality issues. I used to say to him, Phil, why don’t you spend more time fixing the quality issues at the factory rather than getting in your car and nearly killing yourself on the M1. Focus on not urgent, but important. Get in control and master it, over those three habits, is about winning the private victory. Until you’ve done that, you’re not going to be able to go and lead anybody. If you’re not taking responsibility for your life, if you haven’t got a vision and if you can’t prioritize around that, you’re not going to be successful. You may be, in the short term, but it won’t last. You’ll get seen through, very, very quickly.

The next three habits are about winning the public victory. Creating win wins. Win lose isn’t a solution; lose win isn’t a solution, long term. The only way to develop proper solutions, long term, is to go for the win win. Always seek win wins in your relationships.

Seek first to understand, before being understood. Always reach out to try and understand. It’s so difficult to do. We’re all conditioned to our own thinking, our own way, because we’ve got experience. It worked; it didn’t work. We think we know what the answer is. The great line, from Covey, is a father talking about his son, who’s going a bit off the rails. The father says, “I cannot understand my son. He won’t listen to a word I say.” Covey says, yes, but as the father, to understand him, surely you’re supposed to listen to what he’s telling you. It’s such a simple, most obvious bloody thing to think through.

Finally, synergize. Create environments to bring together people and share learning and create a better solution than the one you originally thought was there. It may be a different direction from the one you originally set, although it might be in a similar sort of direction, although not quite the way you were going before.

Then the seventh habit is, keep on doing it. Sharpen the saw, regularly. Covey talks about walking through a wood and there’s a guy there, pouring with sweat, with his saw. He’s sawing away and he says, I can’t get through this wood. It’s just not sawing. Covey says, stop. When was the last time you sharpened the saw? Take a moment to stop, sharpen it and then go again. You’ve got to do that, for your physical self. You’ve got to do that with your social self. You’ve got to do that with your mental self and you’ve got to do it with your spiritual self. In those four angles, he talks a lot about sharpening the saw and techniques to sharpen it.

There’s seven habits that I’ve just laid out there, one of which led me to \[Viktor\] Frankl, others that have led me to other books and thinking. I’ve processed all of that now. I can talk to 500 pages of Covey, in a very and, hopefully, articulate way. But I live it. It’s become a habit. So every day, when I’m faced with a situation, I quickly go, have I taken responsibility, do I know where I’m going, have I prioritized properly, how do I create win wins to help me solve the problem, am I really understanding the issue, who else can help me and how do I synergize? Am I sharpening the saw? Am I, physically, capable of facing this challenge? Do I need to get on my bike, for the next three weeks and get sharper and more up for it? I went out for a bike ride with my next-door neighbor, who says he’s been feeling rough, for six weeks. I took him out for a 50-mile bike ride, on Thursday. Said to him on Sunday, how are you feeling? He went, I feel so different. I’ve got blood going through my body. I’ve got oxygen in my blood and I’m feeling so much better. You have to look after your physical self. Your diet and everything else is really important, as a leader.

That’s the framework and I don’t even need to think about it anymore. I go straight to, am I being proactive? Am I taking responsibility for this situation? If I’m not, what do I need to do about that? Am I blaming somebody else for the situation I’m facing? Am I blaming Boris Johnson, because he keeps me locked down? Or do I say, you know what, this is a great opportunity to learn some things, to spend some time with the family, to think creatively about what life might look like, if I come out of this. God forbid, that I don’t get it and drop dead, which may happen. I’m protecting myself, but if it does happen, then it does happen and that’s life.