# A Study in Decentralization
## by [[Demesne Investments]]


It is generally regarded that the greatest threat to the profitability of any business is competition. However, there is a primordial fact of the human condition that I believe applies just as much to the “business condition” as well: we are often our own worst enemy. Be it people or businesses, self-inflicted wounds are the most insidious. They often begin modestly, sometimes even imperceptibly. They hide in the blind spots created by pride, greed, fear, envy, and complacency. They may suddenly erupt in disaster, as can be seen in the scandals documented on the front pages of the business news. More often however, they escalate gradually, growing so familiar to the
company that its dysfunctions become engrained in its expectation of the status quo. Lethargic bureaucracies, disillusioned customers, recurring restructurings, disgruntled employees, and ill-fated “transformational” acquisitions are some of the more common pathologies that businesses inflict upon themselves.

More often than not, these ailments can be traced back to the intractable quandary of complexity. New employees, customers, processes, and technologies, necessary though they may be, all heighten the challenge (and expense) of coordinating the enterprise’s efforts efficiently. Psychological biases, such as the preference to hire over fire, add to the challenge. Similarly, practical realities, like when legacy processes are too costly to eliminate entirely, demand workarounds and redundancies that likewise enflame complexity.

Whatever way that complexity first begins to set its roots, it is clear that those roots spread with a momentum that is difficult to arrest. As a business becomes more complicated, the opportunities for misadventures multiply. Bureaucracy commonly takes hold as managers, fearful of relinquishing authority, create rigid hierarchies that delegate less desirable work but concentrate decision-making. This same phenomenon cascades down the pyramid, so gate-keeping middle managers proliferate, undermining the agility of the entire organization. Employees lose the line-of-sight to the customer as job functions become increasingly compartmentalized. Envy and self-preservation shift the incentives from maximizing value to maximizing subordinates, budgets, and veto power. More effort is expended achieving internal “alignment” amidst the internal cacophony than rapidly responding to customer needs. “I can fix that” is replaced with “That’s not my department”. For the top management, cause-and-effect is so obfuscated by the complexity of the organization, it seems like the only way they can affect the trajectory of the business is through risky homerun swings like a “transformational” acquisition or sweeping restructurings. Whether it be out of desperation to turn the tide or temptation to prove their own worth, the
results can be crippling.

The stereotype of the ossified, dysfunctional, and rigidly hierarchical “old guard” company ensnared by these dynamics is one familiar to any investor. But we should not let this extreme example fool us into thinking that these issues are not universal. While many do not suffer to the extent of our pitiful stereotype, all businesses must grapple with complexity and complexity always comes at a cost.

However, there is a special species of business that I think does an uncanny job mitigating these potential pitfalls: decentralized businesses. There is much to say about decentralization, but at its heart is an ethos that entrepreneurialism should be actively cultivated and protected. It implies a deliberate effort to keep decisions closer to the periphery of the company where customer interactions happen, and a conscious wariness of bureaucratic creep. Decentralized businesses understand that competition is fierce, with advantages won and lost at the margin. Instead of disruptive strategic plans imposed by the corporate office intelligentsia, the head offices of decentralized businesses offer their dispersed subsidiaries seemingly modest competitive advantages, knowing that the local management will know how to magnify them to maximum effect. When done right, the results can be magical – a path to scale without the anchor of bureaucracy, less wasteful capital allocation, stickier customers, greater agility, dominance in small niches, and natural diversification.

In these ongoing letters, I will be expounding upon Demesne’s investment thesis for decentralized businesses in further detail, but a couple points should be made at the outset. First, decentralization is not a silver bullet for commercial or investment success. Competitive dynamics and especially valuation remain critical factors for any investment decision. Second, “decentralization” is a term that means different things to different people. When I use the term, I refer to a working collection of tendencies that I have catalogued in my ongoing study of such businesses. I use the term “tendencies” because these various traits exist on a spectrum. Not all are necessary, and their relative importance varies with circumstances. For these reasons, and the simple fact that every business has areas where it can improve, an evaluation of decentralization is always a subjective one of degree.
Decentralization is all about fostering entrepreneurialism, so it seems especially apropos that I became an entrepreneur to pursue it as an investment strategy. While being a lone entrepreneur means I don’t need to worry about bureaucracy, I still have plenty of daunting challenges and risks that lie ahead. I extend a heartfelt thanks to all who have helped me get this far, and gratitude for the support I know is yet to come.