# Analytical Reading
You now come to another decision point. Now that you have a better understanding of the book's content and its structure, do you want to understand it? Francis Bacon remarked: "Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed an digested." 
You can think of analytical reading as doing that chewing and digesting.This is doing the actual work. This is where a book raises its demand on your time and concentration. Analytical reading is a thorough reading. If [[Inspectional Reading]] reading is the best you can do in a limited time, this is the best reading you can do given unlimited time. This is the stage where you make the book your own by conversing with the author and asking many organized questions. Asking a book questions as you read makes you a better reader.

But you must do more. You must attempt to answer the questions you are asking. While you could do this in your mind, Adler and Van Doren argue that it's much better to do this with a pencil in your hand. The pencil, they argue, becomes the sign of your alertness while you read. Reading a book is a conversation between you and the author. Adler and Van Doren describe the virtues of reading a book:

> When you buy a book, you establish a property right in it, just as you do in clothes or furniture when you buy and pay for them. But the act of purchase is actually only the prelude to possession in the case of a book. Full ownership of a book only comes when you have made it part of yourself, and the best way to make yourself a part of it - which is the same thing - is by writing in it. 
 Why is making a book indispensable to reading it? First, it keeps you awake - not merely conscious, but wide awake. Second, reading, if active, is thinking, and thinking tends to express itself in words, spoken or written. The person who says he knows what he thinks but cannot express it usually does not know what he thinks. Third, writing your reactions down helps you remember the thoughts of the author.
Presumably he knows more about the subject than you do, if not not your probably should not bothering with this book. But understanding is a two-way operation; the learner has to question himself and to question the teacher. he even has to be willing to argue with the teacher, once he understands what the teacher is saying. Marking a book is literally an expression of your differences or your agreements with the author. It is the highest respect you can pay him.


Adler and Van Doren go on to share the many ways to mark a book. They recommend that we underline or circle the main points; draw vertical lines at the margin to emphasize a passage already underlined or too long to be underlined. Place a star, asterisk, or other symbol at the margin for emphasis; place numbers in the margin to indicate a sequence of points made in developing an argument; place page numbers of other pages in the margin to remind ourselves where else in the book the author makes the same points; circle keywords or phrases; and write our questions (and perhaps answers) in the margin (or at the top of the pages). **This is how we remember the best ideas out of the books we read, long after we have read them - by making a book our own through asking questions and seeking answers within it.** As Cicero said, "Nothing  so much assists learning as writing down what we wish to remember."