- Benjamin Graham wrote in *Security Analysis*: "When a rise in the price of a commodity occurs, there will ordinarily be a larger advance, percentage-wise, in the shares of high-cost producers than in the shares of low-cost producers. Contrary to general impression in Wall Street, the stocks of high-cost producers are more logical commitments than those of the low-cost producers when the buyer is convinced that a rise in the price of the product is imminent and he wishes to exploit this conviction to the utmost." This is highly counter-intuitive for most investors. Well-managed low-cost commodity producers usually do not generate higher returns. High-cost producers do, because they show a higher percentage gain in profitability.
- A commodity up cycle lifts all the players in the industry. This is where the low base effect becomes very important. It is relatively easier to improve EBITDA margins from 5% to 10% than from 20% to 40%. This is why the laggards score over the leaders. This makes their stocks go up much faster. In investing, always focus on delta, that is, on the rate of change in earnings growth and its underlying quality.
- When comparing commodity stocks and deciding which one to buy, evaluate them in terms of enterprise value (EV) to installed capacity.
- Most of the time, sector leaders move up first and become expensive. Then the attention turns to the secondary players in the industry. Investors begin to realize that those are cheaper, and they bid them up.
- For loss-making companies with sizable revenues and a low market capitalization-to-sales ratio, even a small improvement in profit margin adds a significant number to the profit value. In addition, loss-making companies usually have sizable tax loss carry-forwards from the previous down cycle, resulting in lower taxes and very high net profits during the up cycle. Newbie investors start extrapolating these temporary supernormal profits numbers into infinity, and they start chasing these stocks at close to their peak earnings. You will often hear analysts (and sometimes even renowned investors) say, "This time it's different, and it is a structural long-term change in the industry dynamics, which should drive sustainably higher valuation multiples." During boom times for any commodity, people forget how horrible the past down cycle was and how horrible the future one will be, too.
- Commodity stocks are valued on an EV/EBITDA multiple, not on price/earnings. Investors in commodity stocks need to shift focus away from the profit and loss statement to a balance sheet-driven approach. When looking at a commodity stock, debt is one of the most important items to look at, as it has a significant impact on earnings (due to tax shield on interest payments) and on market cap during an up cycle. As operating cash flows improve, debt falls, and EBITDA rises for the highly leveraged players, the entire debt reduction amount flows through the equity side of the enterprise value equation and market cap rises sharply. Some companies use the favorable business conditions to refinance their debts at more favorable terms and lower rates of interest. In the section titled "The factor of leverage in speculative capitalization structure" in *Security Analysis*,  Benjamin Graham wrote, "There is some tendency for speculatively capitalized enterprises to sell at relatively high values in the aggregate during good times or good markets. Conversely, of course, they may be subject to a greater degree of undervaluation in depression. There is, however, a real advantage in the fact that such issues, when selling on a deflated basis, can advance much further than they can decline... the over-deflation of a speculative issue in unfavorable markets creates the possibility of an amazing price advance when conditions improve, because the earnings per share then shows so violent an increase..."
- Instead of looking at just the total installed capacity, pay attention to existing capacity utilization and room for excess capacity to take advantage of the higher selling prices in an up cycle. Operating leverage is very powerful in these situations. Keep in mind that operating leverage cuts both ways. Those who accurately identify it end up winning big, and those who misunderstand it end up losing big.
- In a commodity up cycle, the integrated players with captive power and/or raw material linkages are the biggest beneficiaries. 
- Never ignore the power of incentives. Align your interests with those of the insiders. A very good method to identify the turning point in an industry's fortune is when the promoters of many companies start increasing their ownership (via preferential allotment or issuance of warrants to themselves), together, at around the same time, just ahead of a broad-based recovery in their industry.
- Some agricultural commodities, like sugar, are highly water intensive. In those cases, be on the lookout for deficient monsoons, particularly back-to-back ones. This leads to a sharp decline in output. This is what happened in India's sugar sector in 2015. Keep in mind that sometimes, even within a country, the rainfall distribution is highly uneven, leading to water shortage in certain geographies.
- Check whether prices are determined domestically or internationally. Also check whether there are any restrictions on the import and export of the commodity. Sometimes government intervention in the form of anti-dumping duties or minimum import prices also acts as a good support for selling prices. A very profitable timing of entry in such cases is when the government imposes such duties/protectionist measures and deems them to be in force for a period of five years or more (rather than just a single year).
- When many companies start announcing capacity expansions, it is a good signal to reevaluate one's thesis, or to exit. This is because commodity producers tend to engage in misallocation of capital, or "diworsification" initiatives, around the peak of a cycle. They act consistently with what Peter Lynch calls the Bladder theory of corporate finance: The more cash that builds up in the treasury, the greater the pressure to piss it away.
- Commodity stocks are not long-term investments. They generate alpha in a portfolio in a short period of time, driven by a combination of financial and operating leverage, and you exit them not on peak reported earnings but when the *expectations* of margin improvements peak out. A good time to begin planning your exit from a commodity industry is when the government decides to put curbs on its profitability. This usually coincides with the period when the industry starts becoming obscenely profitable and the cycle  is approaching its peak. For example, by the time government intervention began in India's sugar industry, during 2017, smart investors had already made hundreds of percentage points of returns on many sugar stocks and had begun to offload their big winners onto the greedy latecomers to the party.
- Selective opportunistic plays in commodities often arise between the start of the Chinese winter (when many plants shit down because of smog issues) and the beginning of summer (when the plants resume production).
- Commodity investing is highly challenging and counter-intuitive, as stocks can hit fifty-two-week lows even while posting record high earnings. Stocks react less to reported earnings and more to supply dynamics and expectations of margin improvement having peaked out. Commodity stocks typically embark on the inevitable decline from their peak when the markets expect earnings to peak out or decline after a couple of quarters. Once you get a sense that this is happening, do not wait to observe the next quarterly results. Exit while the market is still obliging. Be highly alert and have a firm risk management discipline.
- When only a single firm in the entire industry is profitable, then the commodity in question may be at or near the bottom of the cycle.




See [[Capital Cycle]]