# Asda and UK food retail

#InPractise 
### There are a number of trends the major UK grocery retail players have had to contend over the last few years. In no particular order, there’s the hangover from the space race, the rise of the online channel, the large market share gains of the discounters at the expense of the large four incumbents. What stands out to you about how the incumbent players have navigated these changes in the market?

I think that clearly all of those factors have played some part in the evolution of the industry over the last 10 years. Maybe the roots of it were laid when Aldi first came into the UK in 1990. The one, for me, that is most obvious when you look at the analysis and the numbers and share performance and impact on top and bottom line is the rise of the discounter format. A number of years ago it was perceived as never being relevant to the way the British person wanted to shop. A sense of foreign discounters selling cheap food piled high that isn't very good quality, the service proposition is not very good, no baskets or no trolleys. There was a whole plethora of negativity around the discounters. For me, customers have clearly changed their perception of shopping for food in a different setting.

The speed at which that has gained momentum is quite remarkable really. I joined at Asda in April of 2010, at that point, [[Aldi]] and [[Lidl]] had a share of 3-4% of the UK market and it had taken them 20 years to get there. 9 years further on, they've got a share of just over 13% as measured by Kantar in the last 12 weeks. And they’ve probably got a volume share, which is the most important dynamic from a retail perspective, of more like 17%. That is just staggering. So, whilst online, and the space race, and store size and all that, are all very relevant, all those factors combined support this discounter argument. At the end of the day, the discounters aren't online. It's clearly not a factor in their performance. You could argue that it's a factor in the performance of the big four, in the sense that they overinvested and over-relied on online, in my opinion. The resources that have been put into there, the financial resources and the manpower, could have been better used to reposition themselves on price to a certain extent. I think it's absolutely the growth of the discounters and all the reasons behind that have brought the biggest change.

### When you were at Asda in 2010 how was the discounter threat assessed? How did people within the company think of the competitive threat?

I joined as commercial director, so that was a board position and I had responsibility for the whole of the fresh food category. So the revenue was about £8.5 billion and the GP was about £3 billion a year. Just after I joined Andy Bond resigned and handed the reins over to Andy Clarke. I'd worked with Andy Clarke at Iceland, an even more value conscious retailer, High Street based, predominantly frozen food. Andy had been there for about 12-18 months and we had struck up a good relationship. He came down to my desk literally within the first 2 or 3 weeks of me joining the business and he said “What's your view? Impress us.” And I said, “You’re far too expensive. You're losing share in all the big categories and you need to do something on price.” So we invested the thick end of £100 million and it started to turn round the volume performance. Clearly, there was a bigger issue with deflation and a fairly chunky issue on the bottom line at that point in time, but it was covered by other categories. For the next two years, we pursued a strategy of much more aggressive pricing, like the discounters, on the key items, bread, milk, beef mince, those types of products.

Then, in 2013, there was a distinct change in approach and the foot came right off the gas in terms of investment in price. In the end, I got so frustrated that by the middle of 2015 I decided to leave the business, because I couldn't see how my belief about what we needed to do was compatible with [[Walmart]]'s desire to protect the bottom line. When you are expected to deliver messages to a team of 200 people and your own belief about those messages is not consistent then it's time to move on. That's what I eventually did.

They were consciously aware, from a big four perspective, that value for Asda was everything. The quality perception was below where it was for other big four retailers. The availability perspective and range statistics were below the others. They had a good position on newness and event management, so getting behind Valentine's Day or Christmas or Easter. They scored well and highly on innovative products for customers. And they scored quite high on the service proposition. Ultimately, value and pricing were the most exposed in my view, and probably still are, from the discount threat. Five years on, they've lost two and a half points of market share. I put that directly down to their unwillingness to invest in the price proposition when it was really required.

There were one or two opportunities that I think they also missed. In 2010, about 3 or 4 months after I joined, they acquired the Netto business. They had to divest some stores for that, from a competition perspective, but they ended up with 150 supermarkets between 15,000-25,000 square feet. There was a big debate at the time about how to position that format, and they chose to go supermarket, they chose to go range, so 14 different types of olive oil. And on the price position, Asda have got one national price position.

There was an alternative, which was to go discount. With hindsight and connecting the dots, they probably made a mistake at that point. They had a trial in Pontefract, I can’t remember what the store was called, I think it was ‘Essentials’ and they argued the numbers didn’t stack up. That had been running for about 18 months. The then trading director Darren Blackhurst, who’s now at Morrisons, was a massive advocate and believed in the discount market and believed that those 140 stores should have been turned into discounters, but they passed up on the opportunity.

### Let’s talk about the underpinnings of the discounter model compared to the Big Four retailers.

I think it's a tough one to try to break down and make as simple as possible. In my view, initially, it's all about price. But it's a bit like Jim Collins’ flywheel principle, once the flywheel gets moving in a certain direction and momentum is created, there are a number of other reasons which start to build and the flywheel just keeps getting faster and faster and more and more difficult to stop.

Going back to 2008, obviously there was a significant recession and customers’ disposable incomes were falling, so the requirement for a lot of customers to shop in a discount operation became more relevant. Even if they didn’t particularly want to be seen in an Aldi or buying Aldi products and having them in their fridge, there was a requirement for them to do that. And with a 20-25% price differential, that’s a compelling reason. Added to that the fact that it’s a limited range, means that when you shop in a discounter, there isn’t the temptation to think, “I like that garlic bread with a bit of cheese on it, but it’s double the price of the normal garlic bread” because it just doesn’t exist in a discounter because there isn’t the range. Not only are the discounters cheaper on everyday items, but there isn’t the seduction to buy other items. When the customer walks out of the discounter the message that they used to give to us was: “It’s so cheap in there, my basket in Sainsbury's is £120 and at the discounter it’s £70.” That was the ultimate driver.

Where I think the discounters have scored exceptionally well, and in some cases possibly without giving themselves enough credit for it, is the quality of their products has improved. Most of what they did was clever, they went to the factories and the manufacturers that were supplying the big four. By the way, overall, the supplier base would have a fairly negative perception of the big four, they believe they’re bullies, they believe they get them in there and squeeze them down on price and their tactics are unethical in a number of examples, hence the whole grocery code of conduct.

A new kid comes on the block, very simple and easy to deal with, no category management, no nights out, no Wembley football tickets, so very low cost to deal with, keep it dead simple. And they think: “We can give these discounters marginal capacity and we can give these guys really good product. All we've got to do is turn up there, we’ll do a 6-month contract, they’ll buy the product, they pay us on time,” because the Germans have just got a very good mentality on payment. They were then able to wrestle and sort the supply base out playing around at the edges. I’ll come back to that because I think that’s moving on a little bit now as their volume gets bigger and they can’t pick up the marginal excess capacity in the market.

On that basis, they were able to produce some really, really good quality product. It’s a lot easier if you’re running a carrot cake down the line to Sainsbury’s specification to just switch the packaging to the Aldi product, rather than having to re-engineer something that might be inferior to sell at a pound less, if you get my point there. That gave them the edge on quality. Their pricing mechanisms around everyday low price are very compelling to customers. Customers have become very, very suspicious of buy-one-get-one-frees, one minute it’s £1, the next it’s 50p, it’s advertised as half-price and then the next minute it goes back to 85 pence, that yoyo pricing in the big four, which they’re fixed into because it’s what drives their volume. Discounters don’t do that and that gives customers confidence that if the prices come down, it’s a genuine reduction, if the price has gone up, it’s a genuine increase. There’s a reliability there.

Non-food is a really important part of their proposition. It represents somewhere between 10% and 15% of their sales. It looks like a jumble sale when you walk into the store, but it’s very compelling. It drives customers to come in every week to see what’s new and different in that store. And you can get some amazing bargains on products you would never even imagine you would walk in there to buy, fishing tackle, shower units, garden gnomes, I mean the list is endless. But it’s all very well executed. It looks like a jumble sale, but it’s tapped into this “I can get a bargain in here, because that’s a really good product.” What that does is it drives customers in but it also drives roughly about 40-45% margin mix, which is incredibly healthy for the bottom line. The big four have not been able to find a way to add that level of flexibility and churn into their offer. Basically, the methodology there is: you open up on a Thursday morning with a weekly leaflet advertising those products, you hope to have sold something like 60-70% of it by Sunday night, the balance of it gets sold Monday, Tuesday, some of it has to be cleared through, some of it ends up as waste. But the idea that you’ve got to get in there on Thursday or Friday if you want to guarantee you’ll get stock. It’s a call to action.

Location is important for the discounters. People are fed up of having to spend 3 hours in a big supermarket. You can shop at a discounter in a quarter of the time it takes to get the escalator to get to the top floor at Asda Pudsey. What the big four once considered to be a real asset for them, which was getting everything under one roof, has now been turned on its head because the stores are too big to shop. What you’re tending to find is, whilst we weren't losing customers necessarily, we were losing a fairly significant share of their basket because they would make two shops. They would go to an Aldi to spend their £70-80 on their core essentials and then they would go to the Asda up the road and they would pick up the items that they couldn't buy in an Aldi. Spend was going down but you were still having to satisfy that customer.

Aldi and the discounters store locations position was incredibly well thought through. When you look around - maybe not so much anymore because some of that space is saturated now - they are almost cannibalizing the big boys by being located exceptionally close to them. They are almost in their car parks. When you read articles back in the early 90s and 2000s, people were saying these guys will never break in, they’re a different proposition, they’re a different market. Slowly but surely as customers have become more and more aware of the fact that you can get great value and great products, and there has been a blurring of the two perceived markets, people who shop in discounters and people who don’t.

### What led the incumbents to think there were two markets?

Their ignorance and naivety.

### Hubris?

That is exactly the right word. A belief that who in their right mind would want to go and buy fresh meat and poultry from a German discount retailer. Even as I'm saying this, there is a certain amount of arrogance in my own mindset, I could still convince myself: “Why would they?” But, actually, if you deliver a great quality product at the right price…

I don't know if you watch much TV, I watched a TV ad the other night. It started off with a load of carrots in a basket and then it panned out to a beautiful shot of a rolling English countryside with cows and everything in the fields, and a farmer talking about this that and the other. It looked like a Sainsbury's or Morrisons advert but, at the end of it, very subtly, it just said Aldi and “They do value” at the bottom.

They are more British in their procurement strategy than the big four. They've been banging on about that message, the Britishness element of what they do. There were British flags everywhere on their materials. It supports this view that price was the initial catalyst. And, yes, timings around the recession in 2008 drove a greater awareness of shopping at the discounters. But, over time, all the other factors have started to make people realize these are a really good bet. There are two other things I'd like to comment on. Firstly, a fantastic focus on single item merchandising. Asda used to be really good at it but they're not as good at it anymore. Making a real hero out of individual products. You cannot read any articles about wine in the last 5 or 6 years, without Aldi being in the top 2 or 3 on a particular wine. I saw one the other day about some moisturizer cream that would cost you £300, the equivalent is £7 at Aldi. So they make real features of these products and most of them you can't actually buy anywhere else.

Another thing I'd like to comment on is waste. With fresh food, customers are becoming more and more conscious of waste. In Asda, we had base position on premium tomatoes at £1.85, and sold two for £3. Who wants two packets of tomatoes that are going to go out of date within 3 days? Aldi's position is to sell everyday at £1.45. Now, the challenge for Asda is if they unpicked that multibuy and sold it at £1.45, immediately, they've probably got, on the base price we’re talking a 20% deflation. Multiply that by the store and you can see just what a challenge that is for the big four to get anywhere near Aldi on price. Not only have they got their bottom-line impact, but the top line is going to significantly reduce. And we all know, that as a publicly listed company, you've got to report everything every three months on your numbers, negative like for likes is a recipe for a CEO to lose his job.

### To what extent do you feel that Aldi and Lidl’s existence as private businesses has conferred them tactical or strategic advantages, as they've looked to roll out operations at scale in this country?

I think that gives them the ability to stay under the radar, and pursue their strategies without the spotlight of having to report numbers, and go to the market and tell them what's happening. Play the long game effectively. I always remember Malcolm Walker, chairman and founder of Iceland, saying to me that the day he floated the company financially was an amazing day, but it was the day he completely lost control of the business, because he was constantly at the beck and call of analysts and commentators crawling all over the numbers, and shareholders wanting quicker returns than he felt he could deliver. The discounters have played a long, long game in the UK and it looks like it's paying off.

### How were the incentive structures set up at Asda at the time that you were there? Did the incentives lead to behavior that was to the detriment of the long-term positioning of the business?

I was incentivized significantly, to a large extent, big numbers. There was incentivization on my like-for-like sales performance, in my categories and my bottom-line profit delivery. In the year when I joined, in 2010, clearly, I’d just joined the business so the numbers had already been baked in for that year, January to December. So, the re-budgeting process started in September, and I got what I would call relief in my P&L from value investments, which were reflected in the top line numbers, effectively deflation. The incentives were based around top line revenue growth, and bottom line cash profit. Now, I wouldn’t have hit a single number if I’d have done what I needed to do and invested £500 million in pricing.

I was not incentivized on volume, which ultimately is the biggest and most important driver. Volume is important. Everything in a retail operation is about boxes and packets. How many people you need in store is determined by how many packets you’re going to put on the shelves and how many items you’re going to scan through the till.

The distribution network is the same. Suppliers don’t give you better deals because your revenue has gone up, suppliers give you better deals because your volume’s gone up. If you go back two years there was fairly significant deflation in the UK market and most of the big four’s numbers were negative comps. That’s partly down to deflation, also loss of volume. You’ve seen a flip; we’re now been in an inflation period probably for about the last two years. So everybody is reporting, except for Sainsbury’s, positive like-for-likes, but it masks the underlying volume decline. So, CEOs hide behind inflation, ultimately. The rising tide lifts all boats, but as soon as the tide goes out you watch the numbers, they're going to sink back down again. The Aldi's of this world are protected from all of that. They do what they need to do, they don't have to report the numbers, if they do, it’s fairly top line.

### The UK was famously one of the most profitable food retail markets in the world with above average margins globally. There has been to a large extent, a rebasing in price. How much of the rest of the story as this game plays out over the next couple of years is price versus other dimensions for the incumbents?

Profit margins over 7%, Aldi thought, “We’ll have some of that. We can go in there and create a new position.” It probably took them longer than they anticipated, but we've discussed that already. There's one school of thought which says the horse has bolted from the stable and it's too late to shut the door. That may play out. If you think about what share the big four have lost. In the last five years, they've probably lost combined somewhere between 600 and 700 basis points of share, which on a market of £180 billion is a significant amount of revenue. Weigh up whether or not an Asda could, under private ownership, take a very long term view and say “We've got 20% of the UK market, we've got revenue at £22/23 billion, if we can just encourage a certain percentage of customers back into our business, encourage more of them to buy more product from us, what a significant rebasing of the price could do for them.”

If you look at it as being exclusively a price issue - and it isn't because I've just articulated all of the other reasons why this has happened - but if you thought about price being the catalyst that needs to change, that someone needs to make a move on price and go out there with an enormous campaign saying “These discounters have been doing a fantastic job in bringing great value products in the UK, well hang on a minute, there’s somebody who’s going to match them now.” You don’t need to match them everywhere; you just need to tweak some elements of the offer.

You could potentially create a scenario where you could completely rebase the profits of Asda for the next 5-6 years with a game plan that says we’re going to have 20 to 22% market share or even above that. They may have to make some strategic acquisitions to bolster some of that. I think Tesco is too far away on price. I think Morrisons are maybe not as far away as Tesco. Sainsbury’s are a million miles away.

### What exactly do you mean on that? Maybe this is a good opportunity to talk about the price gap between discounters and the mainstream retailers and how big that might be now.

I think Asda are 12-15% away from Aldi. I think Morrisons and Tesco are probably 17-18% and I think Sainsbury’s are probably 22-25% away from Aldi. Across the board, it wouldn’t be that big on everyday, but if you were doing a general shop, that’s roughly where I think you’d position it. That’s why I say Asda would have a sniff at getting closer without completely wrecking the P&L.

It wouldn’t just require a repositioning of price; it would require a change in pricing strategy. By that I mean removing promotions or most of them and removing multi-buys or linked saves, which would be painful but would need to be done across the store.

It’s a much, much smaller scale, but I remember thinking back to when Malcolm Walker came back into Iceland in 2005 - and hey, I was probably part of the problem at Iceland for 3 or 4 years, and probably ignored a lot of stuff that was staring me in the face and again, connect the dots looking back. Malcolm came back into business and he got rid of most of the groceries and most of the chilled food, focused on frozen, rebased all the prices, sold 25-30 shops to M&S, and built himself a bit of a war chest off the back of the sale of those stores and put the profits from about £15-20 million and a 1.5-2% margin, at the time, to £180 million over the next three to 4 years. That was a fairly quick turn over. I don't think you would be able to do that in Asda, where the scale of the numbers is significantly bigger. But, it’s an interesting case study in really focusing on your core principles. At the end of the day, Asda is a value retailer that isn't giving customers the best value in the market. In my opinion, that is only going to head in one direction, unless it takes a strong position on price.

### I guess we're getting to the crux of the story here. You’re saying one of the necessities of dealing with the discounter threat is taking short-term pain in return for long-term gain. But this is extremely difficult in an environment where the incentives for incumbent management of the Big Four reward shorter term behavior.

Yes. You would have to do what \[Iceland CEO\] Malcolm Walker did, which was come back in and fire every single member of staff in the management team bar one, and put your own team in. You would have to hand pick them from around the industry, people you've worked with before, with a good track record et cetera. I could give you two or three names now of people who I think could go in there and do a job in Asda and say to them, “Here's the plan. Here's the top line numbers. Here's what we think. What do you think?”

When they got rid of Mourinho, they didn't just get rid of Mourinho at Old Trafford, they got rid of everybody, the goalkeeping coach, the penalty taking coach, the people who teach you how to take corners. Nine of them went. It cost them £20 million to get rid of them all. 10 weeks later they've got a team that looks completely motivated. And the top ten superstars weren’t even available last match. Sorry to use football as an analogy because it's not necessarily directly related. But you have to do that. You have to be brutal. That's what Malcolm Walker did when he came back in and I was part of that.

### How does the culture at Sainsbury’s compare to the culture at Asda? How are executives compensated?

I think Sainsbury's is an even more difficult challenge. If you're in Asda, you get value, somewhere deep down in your psyche is value and straightforwardness. It’s Yorkshire-based and has its roots in dairy farming, and to an extent that that’s still in there. Archie Norman turned around the business in 1999, when the shares at one point were worth 4 pence. He recovered it and turned it around. He wrote a paper on the chairman’s value, which, for me, carried Asda for a number of years. It was essentially linked to “We drive out costs and we’re absolutely ruthless with it.” We drive out costs, and by driving out costs we can invest in price, and by investing in price, we drive more volume, and by driving more volume we can further reduce our costs. You just end up in a virtuous circle. That is well understood deep down in the psyche of Asda. They may have lost sight of it to a certain extent but it's there.

But I don't think it's there in any shape or form at Sainsbury's. I think they are in a different stratosphere in the context of value. I can't remember the CEO's name who relocated the office from Blackfriars to Holborn. Their office has got one of the highest land property values in the UK. Why would you locate a retailer operating, even then, at 6% to 7% percent operating margins in a location like that with their head office there? That sort of says it all for me. You walk round their building and everything is gold-plated. The buyers there understand the price of everything but the value of nothing. It's quite eye opening when you walk in there. Interestingly, I spent 3 months back in 2016/17, working directly with their meat team, helping them work out how they were going to address the discounter problem. I produced a document which basically outlined how they should operate, what they needed to do. When Paul Mills-Hicks looked at it, he said, “We’re not a discounter.” And I said, “No, but you need to think like a discounter.” He just poo-pooed it. The word you used earlier, “hubris,” to me, that’s exactly that.

I think, from a cultural perspective, Asda have still got an opportunity to do something. They’ve got a position in the market where they are more value orientated. They’ve got a closer price gap. If we’re only talking about price being an issue, I think there are other factors. But I also think they’re quite well placed to deliver that. I think Sainsbury’s have got a real dilemma on their hands. Obviously, their roll of the dice was to try and pull up a merger with Asda and it looks like that’s been scuppered. So it will be fascinating to see what move they make next.

### If we look at the story for the next few years, what do you think is going to define the state of play for incumbents as they meet the discount threat?

One thing that I reflect on a lot is that when you talk to customers, you cannot kid them. It's a bit like the phrase ‘the market will always out.’ If you were trying to sell customers strawberries for £2 and they're quite good, and if somebody else is selling them for £1.50 and they're quite good as well, then eventually they're going to go and buy them from there. It's just that fundamental belief. It’s just recognizing what customers are doing and what customers are telling you and then not putting your head in the sand.

Anybody that can really get a real good understanding: look back at what’s happened over the last 10 years, or 30 years even. Think about how that might project forward and get some really good understanding of how customers’ behavior is going to change and what's going to stay the same, and how we best need to address that. I think that's absolutely fundamental. Then, putting in place strategies that play to your strengths. You can't be what you're not. As an individual you are what you are and you may be able to adapt but your core values and your core essence is exactly that - maybe I’m getting a little bit deep here.

Asda cannot be what it's not. It has to play to its strengths, Sainsbury's too. But I don't think that Sainsbury's strengths are going to be what's required anymore in a new world and certainly the P&L or the business model isn't going to stack up in the same way. Really get a handle on what customers are looking for, learn from the history, and think about how you project forward, and try and connect the dots, which is not easy.

Secondly, understand where your business is best placed to address those things and don't try to be what you're not. But at the same time, don't kid yourself into thinking you're better than you are and that everything is alright. You're going to have to face into some fairly painful decisions, which is probably going to require some fairly significant change in the leadership of a lot of organizations, and some fairly tough conversations. Bring people on board who have probably been involved in those organizations - I'm not pitching myself for a job here - and have stepped away from them and can see a bit more clearly now, who would go back in and do something a bit more radical with the right level of the air cover to make the difference.

### How would you describe the challenge of leadership in this situation. What is required of leaders at Asda to turn the situation around?

This may be massively oversimplifying it, but I personally believe it's what's required: you have to show an enormous amount of humility. You have to accept that maybe the way that you have been running the business or what you have been doing is not right. Now, for most CEOs that is not impossible, but a very, very difficult thing to accept. The week I left Asda, I could feel that the time was coming to do something different. I wasn't happy with what was going on. I got a new boss 5 or 6 months earlier who knew nothing really about food retailing, had been in the Asda business for quite a while. I was really struggling to get my message across to him. I couldn't work it through.

Anyway, he announced this fairly significant restructure on the Monday morning, which involved letting two of my colleagues go, firing them effectively, which was fine, they were no great shakes in my opinion. But the way he handled it and the way he did it, lead me to resign on the Friday. He called me in on the Thursday morning and he said, “What do you think?” and I said, “Look, I don't necessarily agree with everything you've done, but the biggest challenge I face is that I don't agree with how you've done it.” I said to him, “You've lost the department and you've lost me as well” and he went, “What can I do about it?” And I said, “You can get everyone together and you can tell them that you've probably made a mistake. Not all of it is a mistake, but some of it is a mistake. You can demonstrate enormous humility. Stand up, tell them it's a mistake and that you're going to go back and give yourself two weeks to work through some of the challenges that you recognize it’s thrown up. Come back and you’ll have them falling at your feet.” And he said, “I can’t do that. I can't do that.” And I said, “Well, it's what's required and if you can't do it, maybe you’ll have to fall on your sword.”

That was in May, in September he had a massive heart attack. And he got fired 12 months later. I don't know what he's doing now. I'm drawing a lot of conclusions and making suppositions in that comment there. But you read statements from CEOs and it's basically bollocks most of the time. Have you seen Debenhams’ statements this week? They made a forecast on January 10th, they missed it six weeks later and the CEO is still saying they’re on track. What's he smoking?

### So for you it’s all about humility

I’ll use the Jose Mourinho example again. Jose Mourinho, when he does TV interviews, is just the most un-humble, arrogant character you could ever imagine. Getting beaten week in, week out and he comes on the TV cameras and blames everybody else. It’s nothing to do with him. This is a lot of the really interesting Jim Collins stuff when you get under the skin of that level 5 leadership. It's a rare combination that he describes. He describes people who have got amazing resilience and tenacity and believe in doing the right thing, but combined with a level of humility that recognizes that they aren't the be all and end all. I've not met many CEOs like that in my career to be honest.

I think when Jim Collins talks about level 5 leadership that's what he's talking about, the ability to say “You know what, I’ve messed this up here. We're getting this wrong. What are we going to do?” and calling in ideas and thoughts. You can't do it every time, of course. There’s a fascinating bit in Nelson Mandela’s Long Walk to Freedom: his very early days of leadership were defined by the way in which the tribe he was in used to make decisions.

Basically, if there was an issue, a drought, whatever it was, the leader of the tribe would call everybody in and they would walk for miles in some instances just to come to this meeting place. The leader would outline the issue and then everybody was allowed to speak, nobody was interrupted, some people used to waffle on for hours and never get to the point, but everybody was allowed to speak in the context of that issue. At the end, they would take a vote and if it wasn't absolutely unanimous - a majority was not allowed - they would all go home and come back the next day and continue the debate.

Only when there was a unanimous decision, did the leader finally speak, and he would say, “This is the decision we have come to, based on everything we have heard.” Then they would have a big party with a load of food and then somebody would take the piss out of the leader and humble him in front of everybody else. Mandela's conclusion to that was that a leader is like a shepherd, he is at the back of the flock, he's not at the front. He is at the back of the flock guiding the sheep, checking on the ones that are straying every now and then and moving things forward, allowing the most nimble sheep to move forward and ahead. I think that's a really powerful leadership philosophy and one that I totally and utterly subscribe to. And I think that is what some of the big four are requiring at the moment.