See [[Mergers and Acquisitions]]

ASSA ABLOY, the global leader in locks and door opening solutions, commands brands and businesses dating back four centuries. The Chubb brand, for example, was founded in 1818 in Wolverhampton, England and served a prestigious clientele that included the Duke of Wellington, the bank of England, and the General Post Office for installation in all the country's iconic red Royal Mail Boxes. The product of a merger in 1994, ASSA was founded in 1881 in Eskilstuna, Sweden and ABLOY in 1907 in Helsinki, Finland. Mergers and Acquisitions have been a vital part of ASSA ABLOY's continued growth ever since. 

During the late 1990s and early 2000s, ASSA ABLOY was a prodigious deal maker as it consolidated a fragmented market. Since 2006, under the leadership of CEO Johan Molin, it has made over 120 acquisitions, primarily to expand geographical distribution and secondarily to deepen technological sophistication. During that period, the company added 8% annually to revenue so that today, nearly half the group's total revenue flows from businesses acquired under Mr. Molin. At the time of acquisition, businesses typically had lower operating margins, by as much as five percentage points. On integration, margins rose. Everything else being equal, acquisitions would have diluted group operating margins meaningfully, from 15% in 2006. Thanks to strategic savvy and exploiting synergies, margins instead rose to more than 16% in 2014. 

In one illustrative acquisition, among the biggest, ASSA ABLOY in 2002 acquired Besam, the world leader in automated door systems. Until then, ASSA ABLOY lacked a substantial presence in this segment, but the company went on to make Besam the foundation of an even wider division called Entrance Systems.  This now amounts to one quarter of group sales. Broadly in line with its typical acquisition multiple, ASSA ABLOY paid 1.5 times sales. Since then, Besam's  operating margins have increased substantially, delivering high earnings growth over the period and solid returns on the acquisition. 

But most ASSA ABLOY acquisitions are small, simple and complementary, which are reasons why its roll-up strategy works despite the perils of this approach to business growth. Another factor is a tendency to buy private companies rather than public companies, often offering scope to professionalize manufacturing efficiency and processes - some targets had been operating at only 50% of production capacity. 

ASSA ABLOY's decentralized structure eases integration and enables multiple deals to be coordinated simultaneously. Newly acquired businesses readily plug into the group's vast distribution network, know-how and innovation. ASSA ABLOY's production structure and processes undergo continuous rationalization in response to ongoing growth, evolving from traditional component manufacture towards low-cost outsourcing and automated assembly. The dynamism is apparent from the evolution of ASSA ABLOY's operations: since 2006, the company has closed 71 factories and 39 offices while converting another 84 factories to assembly plants. 

Experience adds value. Making hundreds of acquisitions over several decades yields institutional knowledge and wisdom. The demonstrated ability to avoid overpaying and execute on integration promotes predictability and renders related forecasting more reliable. While allocating the bulk of corporate capital to acquisitions can destroy value, ASSA ABLOY shows that, executed well, it can create prosperity: its share price has risen six-fold in the past decade. Its rationale for growth through acquisitions persists: although it is twice the size of the industry's second-largest manufacturer, ASSA ABLOY still only commands just over 10% of the global market. 
