If shopping for a parachute, the chances are high that you would care about one thing above all else: that it worked. If offered a parachute selling for a fraction of the price but with greater risk of malfunctioning, you would be extremely unlikely to take up the offer. The impact of failure would be perceived to be too large to be worth it. (see [[Switching costs]])

Many consumer products pose the parachute scenario. Another company may offer a lower cost option, but the consequences of failure are seen as devastating so consumers will pay more for products such as child safety equipment, life jackets, bicycle helmets, and fire alarms, to name a few. For customers, the value of knowing - or believing -that they are choosing the most reliable or highest quality product can translate into a highly sustainable willingness to pay a premium price.

Consider the assurance effect in the context of manufacturing processes. If the failure of a small machine or input component can cause the shutdown of a manufacturing plant, customers will work with only one or two suppliers. While customers know this will result in a higher cost, they are willing to pay extra for reliability. Suppliers of industrial gases such as oxygen, hydrogen  and carbon dioxide illustrate the point: while such gases are scarcely proprietary, they have a few peculiar characteristics that give their suppliers an edge. They constitute a small cot of many manufacturing processes but are expensive to store in large quantities. if supplies are disrupted, entire chemical plants and refineries are forced to close, causing substantial economic losses. The upshot? A new low-cost provider with no reputation will often lose to a higher cost provider with a good track record.

Assurance benefits also appear in many settings outside of manufacturing. When parents buy baby food, a well-known brand like Nestlé's Gerber provides assurance that the food is healthy and safe. Companies pay a premium to use well-known product testing or auditing firms - such as the Big Four - both as an internal assurance benefit and because it offers assurance to stakeholders. Farmers pay a premium to tractors from manufacturers such as John Deere because they offer time-tested quality products, fearing the risk of equipment failure on harvest result.

Assurance benefits are often based on [[Reputation as signaling| Reputation]]. A Reputation of high quality or reliability is earned over time. To compete with reputation is almost impossible, no matter how much money is staked on it.
