# Auto Insurance Claim Process

by #InPractise 

### Todd, can you share a short introduction to your experience in the industry please?

I started in the insurance industry back in 1986. I graduated from college with a four-year degree and applied and started working with State Farm Insurance in West Lake Village, California, which is just north of Los Angeles, as a fire claim representative handling homeowner claims. Over the first seven or eight years of my career, I handled a variety of claims, from homeowner property to casualty, to litigation; a lot of catastrophe claim handling. State Farm had a program where, if a large hailstorm or a hurricane hits and it just inundates the local claim staff, they take adjustors from throughout the United States, fly them into wherever, Miami or Dallas, Texas, to work for 28 days. I did a lot of that, then I gradually worked my way into leadership. At one point I was a claim consultant for State Farm Insurance in their Bloomington, Illinois home office, and consulted for various regions throughout the United States. In the last 10 years of my career at State Farm, I was a claim manager. I had a variety of teams. The one for the last five years was an operation called field assignment where I had 500 adjustors throughout the United States, four directors about eight first line leaders in that whole operation, and they handled the field claims for State Farm.

State Farm went through a huge change or transition from the good neighbor, going out and shaking hands, meeting with people, and handling claims one on one, to more of a call center environment where they centralized almost all of the employees in two or three locations and used a small field operation to handle those field interactions. In 2018, I was severed from State Farm in another transition, and they dropped about 70 or 80 claim manager positions. I left them in April of 2018 and then joined my new company, Stillwater Insurance Group in Jacksonville, Florida, as Vice-President of Litigation and Compliance.

### Can we walk through a typical claims process. Let’s say I have a policy which states I crashed my vehicle. What’s the start of the process?

Let me take it from a homeowner claim first, and then we can get into auto because I know that’s much more common. A typical homeowner claim, for example, would be a pipe burst in your home. You leave for work at eight o’clock in the morning and at nine o’clock, the water supply line to the washing machine burst and floods the house. You come home at five o’clock and there’s water in your house. You call up your insurance agent and submit a claim. That claim is immediately assigned to a claim adjustor; some companies call them claim examiners, most are claim adjustors. The adjustor would make contact with you to find out what happened, and they’ll gauge how bad it is. If it’s a real bad loss, they’ll immediately send out a water mitigation company to dry out the home, suck all the water out, and put fans in the home. Then they’ll work with you. Set up an appointment to come out, inspect the property, measure the rooms to a diagram and assess the amount of damage. Ideally, they would then write an estimate for those damages and pay you for your insurance claim. Then it would be up to you, the insured, to get the repairs done to your home. If there are differences in the estimate, you reconcile those throughout the process. Once the home is fixed, or once you’re satisfied, this claim is closed.

On the auto side, it’s similar but auto can be a little more complex because oftentimes automobile accidents result in not just damage to the automobile, but perhaps to someone else’s auto or property, and then the injuries that go along with that. So that turns into a liability claim. If you rear-end someone in your vehicle and injure them, they go to the doctor and they would make claim against you because you were at fault for the accident. Your policy covers injuries to a third party, and depending on what coverages you have, it covers the damage to your car, and it covers the damages to the other person’s car.

### How do you look at the change strategy by State and all the big insurers in terms of the claims process where companies are looking to reduce the cost and moving to more automated claims?

Back when I started in the late 80s, the technology was nowhere near what we have today. I don’t know if you’re familiar with AS400 or green screens, but that was pretty much the extent of the computer. It was all done manually, by paper and phone calls, and going out and meeting with people. Meeting with body shops to see how the process was going to get the car repaired, or visiting with the claimant in the case, the injured party, to see how they’re doing and assess their injuries. Today there are fewer claim adjustors because technology allows you to handle much more work. There are many, many, many more claims with fewer people because of the internet and because of an electronic claim system which does a lot of the manual work that an adjustor had to do 20 or 30 years ago. It’s really the technology and the advent of third-party administrators, business partners, business relationships, artificial intelligence. A lot of that is done behind the scenes. Back in the day, one adjustor could maybe receive 20 new claims per month. Today, due to technology, they can handle maybe 50 claims per month.

### In that old process, if I crashed my vehicle and I had a policy with State, you would send a loss adjustor out to see the vehicle? How would you look at the cost and the process of that?

Back in the day, yes, you would. You’d send someone out to look at the vehicle, who would write an estimate for that vehicle and issue you a check or an insurance draft, and then you would go get the vehicle fixed. Today, it is very rare that an insurance adjustor goes out and looks at a damaged automobile. Today, most companies have relationships with a series of body shops. The first call would assess the damage. Oftentimes the customer has an iPhone or the ability to send me a picture, all kinds of technology where I can send you a link. Just like we’re doing right now but I’d have it on my iPhone. I’d say okay, can you go out and show me all four corners of your car? Can you turn it on and show me the odometer? So you have a lot of information, and then we’ll offer and say, here’s three collision repair shops within five miles of your house. You’re welcome to take it to any one of those. We have agreements with those shops that the labor rates are this, in your particular area. You have to use these types of parts. You can’t use original brand name parts from the dealership; you have to use aftermarket parts. Or some policies say it’s okay to use new original parts from the dealership. That body shop repairs your car to your satisfaction, sends the bill to the insurance company and the insurance company pays the auto shop directly. All you’re responsible for is the deductible, which is a couple of hundred dollars. But that’s a mathematical equation. You choose your deductible and it impacts your premium. Kind of like a health care plan, you choose a high deductible plan or a low deductible plan.

### So that loss adjustor position has gone from someone who travels and goes and inspects the vehicle, to someone who sits in an office and manages the manual process on a computer?

That’s correct, and that’s why State Farm evolved to where they’re at today. In the 80s, they had 26 regional offices throughout the US and multiple smaller offices throughout the states. In California, they probably had 50 small claim offices with 20 to 150 claims people in them. Today, they have three large buildings, one in Phoenix, Arizona, one in Dallas, Texas and one in Atlanta, Georgia, that house probably 5,000 to 8,000 people in each office. Because of technology, they don’t have to go out and inspect cars, so they can sit in an office in Dallas and handle a claim in New York City, because they just don’t go out and see them. They rely on technology, photos, videos and third-party vendors, to show them the information that they need.

### But is that information enough?

Yes.

### How does that impact the total loss frequency of vehicles, if you only receive an image versus actually lifting up the bonnet?

Cars that have been manufactured in the last 10 years, such as a 2018 Toyota Corolla, they’re all pretty much the same. You know what a fender costs on a Toyota Corolla; you know what a hood costs on a Toyota Corolla and you know what an axle costs. There’s very little variance on a large number of claims. You’ll get some that are souped up Camaros or a Ferrari or something, and those you do need a little bit more interaction with, but the regular cars, the run of the mill cars, it’s more standard.

We also have technology to say that if you were traveling between 20 and 30 mph and you rear-ended a stopped car, here is the damage that you would expect. We have technology that would show that it’s not going to break the rear taillights. We would expect damage to your grill, to your hood, to your headlights, to your front fenders, and we would have an idea that that repair is going to be between $4,000 and $6,000. If that claim comes in, the photos are similar to what we think, but the body shop says that’s going to cost $13,000 to repair, we say wait a minute. So that’s not going to go through the regular process. Something else will happen to find out why is this thing so far out of the norm.

### So the outliers will have to go back for a more manual process to detect what the issue is.

Sort of, but really for those outliers, you would rely on experts. You would probably hire a crash reconstruction expert, maybe an engineer, maybe an auto expert. Maybe you’d get a competitive bid. You’d tow that car to another location and say, okay, if another body shop can do it for $3,000 and this guy wants $13,000, we’re not paying him $13,000. So it just takes more work. If that car comes in and the estimate is between $4,000 and $6,000, there’s very little human intervention. That body shop fixes the car, they upload an estimate, upload the bill and if it meets certain parameters, it’s automatically paid to the body shop and the claim is automatically closed.

### Do you think the fact that the insurances companies are now using more of a digital loss adjusting process has led to a higher total loss frequency? Or is it actually different variables around the complexity of the vehicle and repair cost, etc.?

Today, total losses are higher and repairs to vehicles are more expensive because, back in the day, you didn’t have to roll over the car; you would have to burn up the car for it to be a total loss. Today, a 25-mph accident where the insured runs into a tree or hits something, and let’s say it’s a five-year-old car with all kinds of technology – Bluetooth technology, satellite radio, digital this and that – if those electronics are damaged, the cost of repair for those electronics can take it over the threshold.

Say for example, a car is worth $10,000. The threshold is generally between 70% to 80%. If the cost of repair is $9,000, we total out the vehicle and just pay you the value of the vehicle. We take possession of the vehicle and sell it to a salvage yard. Back in the day, you could have a 50-mph accident with a Chevy pickup truck that’s basically made of iron and maybe you could fix it for $1,500 and it’s not a total loss. You get in a modern car today, and if it’s in a 50-mph accident, there’s a high likelihood that it’s going to be a total loss. Just with the advent of the newer vehicles and the complexity of the newer vehicles, that has increased total losses.

But on the injury side, surprisingly, it’s gone down. And the reason is the severity, which means the amount you pay out on an injury claim, has gone down. Or it hasn’t increased at a level you would think much greater than inflation. It’s because the safety in vehicles today is incredible. You can have a rollover; you can have a high-speed accident and people walk away from the accidents. Because of air bag technology, because of seat belt laws, because of the strict – at least in the US – guidelines around manufacturing the vehicles, they have to meet certain safety guidelines in order to enter the US market. So the injury side has gone down where the collision or property damage has increased because it’s so expensive to fix cars nowadays.

### So there’s a trade off in what drives the loss frequency between the higher vehicle complexity and cost and the lower or the more safer vehicles’ lower injury severity?

That’s correct.

### How do you look at the drives of declining injury severity? I guess part of that is driven by safety features which can also decrease the accident frequency but also reduce that severity.

Right. It decreases the injury severity because cars nowadays can stop by themselves. If they’re driving around and the driver’s not paying attention, they’ll stop. Teslas and some other vehicles are autonomous where they drive the cars themselves. That’s a whole other score. It’s pretty fascinating, but just with all those, as you would expect, there is a lower number of injuries. There’s a fraud element there. Some people get rear-ended at 4 mph and they go see a chiropractor and have massage therapy and acupuncture for 30 days and run up $10,000 of medical bills and they want me to pay for their pain and suffering. We just have to handle those one offs. But the standard ones where, if you’re in a 2019 Mercedes or BMW or any car, the safety that’s built into those, you wouldn’t expect a severe injury, but it’s a very high cost to repair those vehicles because there’s so much technology in them.

### How do you see the loss frequency evolving over the next 10 years? I think it’s up to nearly 20% today in the US, which is the highest it’s ever been.

I would expect it to go down because when you build a car that drives itself and stops itself and with the engineering that goes into those vehicles, you would expect them to build those, so they don’t hit things, so they don’t run into things and cause accidents. As those cars become more affordable, and as more people purchase and own and drive those vehicles, you would expect the frequency of property damage claims and injury claims to go down.

Same thing with homes. Today, at least in the States, they build smart homes. They turn off the lights, they give you a notice on your phone when you’re at work that there’s water in the home, or that there’s smoke in the home, so you’re able to deter losses before they happen. That should reduce the number of insurance claims, which should reduce the amount of premium that you have to pay for auto insurance. Kids, nowadays, when they graduate from college, at least in the US, many have student loan debt. On top of that, they move out and are paying rent for the first time, then they get hit with an auto insurance bill of $200 a month. Well, that should go down as the claim frequency goes down because insurance companies won’t be paying out as much. Their staff will be less because they’re not handling as many claims. With the efficiency and technology, they won’t need as many people, therefore expense rate show for the insurance company should go down. The smart insurance companies would pass on those savings to the customers so they can be more competitive in the marketplace.

### You think the accident frequency is going to decline as the cars get smarter and crash less often?

They certainly should. We’re always going to have 20, 25-year-old cars, antique cars on the road that don’t have those safety measures, but by the law of large numbers, most people don’t own those kinds of cars. Many people that are affluent can afford to buy a new car every three to five years, maybe six years, and so 10 or 15 years from now, as technology continues to get better and better, you would expect to see a lower frequency.

### You’ve also got the fact that, even though you might have a lower frequency, almost every crash could be a total loss.

Could be, that’s right, because you would insure those cars for a higher dollar amount. If I insure a 1980 Toyota Corolla with a value of $2,000, my insurance premium is not going to be nearly as high because the exposure to the insurance company is only $2,000. If I have a 2020 Mercedes GLC 350 that you paid $50,000 for, the limits that I have to carry on that vehicle are more, so you pay more premium.

### What’s going to be the net effect then on the insurance companies?

The smart insurance companies will see that and manage that, and there are actuaries that look at data and say, okay, if you have 100,000 auto policies and this percentage falls into this category, then you can expect this loss rate to show up in that category. The average cost of a crash in that category is X, and they can divide that out and figure out how much we need to collect in premiums to make a reasonable profit, but to also have enough money in reserves to pay clients.

### Let’s say, for example, accident frequency declines 20% over the next 10 years. We would need a similar increase in the total loss ratio to make sure that the net premiums for the insurers are not massively declining over time. Obviously, the expense ratio and the loss ratio would have to evolve as well, to ensure that underlying profit is still sustainable. How do you balance that out over 10 years for the big insurers?

That’s the actuaries’ job and the job of some very smart financial people who are able to use those algorithms to put that stuff together. There’s another element in the insurance company that plays huge into it, and that’s the stock market, or bonds. For example, State Farm, Progressive, Geico, Farmers, Allstate, some of the larger insurance companies operate at about a 96% income ratio. So they figure out that for your car, the premium’s going to be $1,000. They can price that at $960 because, of all the premium that they take in, they have to put a certain percentage in reserve for losses, but they invest the rest. So the investments offset that 96% to bring them up to maybe a total ratio of 106%, and they’re making a 6% profit. So that’s how the big players with so much surplus, with so much money, oftentimes they can beat some of the smaller players on the premium. Some people look at insurance as a commodity and say, I’m going to put in three different companies; whoever comes up with the cheapest premium, that’s who I’m going with. So the big guys oftentimes can bring their rates down a little lower than some of the smaller ones because they have the surplus in the investment money to offset that.

### Can we go back to the accident frequency? If we look historically, I think we’ve seen a great increase or advancement in the technology used in vehicles, but the accident rate hasn’t fallen as fast as we’d thought. Why do you think it is that we consistently see the accident rates fall more slowly than how quickly technology and safety features evolve?

I don’t think we’re there yet to full autonomous vehicles. When we are, then I think we’ll see a better rate. The other thing is, in America, Americans love their cars and in other countries and in a few states within the United States – Manhattan in New York City for example – there are a lot of cars on the road, but most people commute. My daughter is moving to Manhattan and she’s going to sell her car because she can’t get around in her vehicle. You’re using the subway, you’re using taxis. With the advent of Uber and Lyft, many kids nowadays don’t go out drinking on Saturday night and then get in their car and wreck their vehicle. Today it’s very, very acceptable to get a group of friends together, go out to a pub, go out to a bar, watch the game and have a few beers, and they don’t drive. They get into an Uber and go home. That is probably first generation here. When I was a kid, it was taxicabs, but nobody’s going to take a taxicab; everybody drove. So that puts a lower number of high-risk people on the road.

The problem is places like California. I grew up in Southern California and everybody’s got a car, everybody’s got two or three cars. And they’re all on the road at rush hour in the morning and the evening, and there’s frustration and road rage, and there are just too many darned cars for the infrastructure. The infrastructure has not kept up with the population and the number of cars. In California, you probably see that it’s just bumper to bumper on the roads, on the freeways, all the time. It’s just so many cars and so many distractions like cellphones and social media, that contributes greatly to accident rates. We need to get past that hurdle in places like California and Texas and Florida, and embrace more subways and mass transportation to get some of the cars off the road. That’s where you’re not seeing the frequency go down as much as it probably will 10 years from now.

### That’s the question. What do we actually need to see to have huge declines in accident frequency? Because everyone’s going to be using their phones. If there’s going to be more entertainment in the car, it’s arguably somewhat more distracting. There’s always more cars on the road. It seems like we need a huge step change in technology towards more autonomous, or even level 5 autonomous, to actually cause a big decline in accidents.

I don’t see insurance companies going extinct any time soon. There are some that will always want to drive their car, love to drive their car, and there are some that don’t heed the warnings that you can’t text and drive, you can’t email and drive, you can’t put a video on your dashboard and watch a movie while you’re driving. So some people, like it or not, are going to continue to do that so insurance companies will remain in business. I don’t see the concept of insurance, with automobiles or homeowner insurance or business insurance or health insurance, actually leaving the market, probably in my lifetime or maybe in the next couple of generations. I don’t see it happening.

### Let’s take a Tesla or a really advanced vehicle. Does the insurer look at that very differently to, like you said, a Toyota Corolla, that doesn’t have that advanced technology inside?

Yes, you would. You would insure it differently. It’s probably more, but it’s different. Insurance companies offer discounts for behaviors like accident-free. They’ve come up with something in the last decade or so which is a chip that you put in your car that monitors how fast you go, how far you go, how many miles you drive.

### UBI.

If you drive less than 1,000 miles a month, you get a pretty good discount on your auto insurance. If you drive more than 1,000 a month, it’ll put you into another category.

### Let’s say two similar drivers, or the same driver with no past history, wants to drive a Tesla versus a normal Toyota. Why would a Tesla be more expensive if it supposedly has more safety features?

Because it costs more to fix it. And even a Tesla gets hit by hail, is in a hurricane, and cars don’t do well with saltwater. So you’re still going to have the potential for property damage. It’s going to go down with autonomous driving in theory, and the Tesla is going to have tremendous safety features. It’s probably going to have 15 airbags in the car and it’s going to stop itself. So you’re going to pay more for the value of the car because a Tesla costs you whatever, $60,000 to $70,000 where a Toyota Corolla costs you $25,000 to $30,000. It’s cheaper to repair the Corolla; more expensive to repair the Tesla. But even if you’re a safe driver, if you’re in control of the vehicle with all the human distractions, there’s going to be a higher likelihood for accident when you’re in the Toyota.

The other thing that insurance companies are grappling with now is from a liability standpoint. When that Tesla does, for whatever reason, slam into another car and cause injuries, who’s responsible for that? Is it the person who’s sitting in the driver’s seat but wasn’t controlling the vehicle, or is it Tesla who’s responsible because a glitch went wrong with the car? That’s a challenge because, right now, the liability rests with the driver of the vehicle. There is some negotiation you can get into with Tesla from a subrogation standpoint, but it’s really a kind of a conundrum, if you will. What happens to the liability with autonomous vehicles?

### And even if Tesla has plans to roll out vehicles at $30,000 or the equivalent of a Toyota, obviously that would have far more electronics than the Toyota.

Right.

### So how would that then affect the premium?

It’s the same concept. Because with more technology, more graphics and more computer chips, but also with weather, snow, ice, salt, it’s another one. The Tesla, how does it drive in snow? How does it drive in icy conditions, in fog? I don’t know the answer to that. But either way you look at it, it’s going to be more expensive to repair a Tesla or a 2020 Chevrolet Corvette, which is a high-performance vehicle. It’s just more expensive to repair those vehicles than a standard Honda or Toyota or Chevy coming off the lot.

### So even if we do get to very cheap EVs and Teslas and other manufacturers, those are going to be more expensive to insure for consumers, which could actually put them off to a certain extent?

Yes, that could be the case. Right now, they’re more expensive, but the other thing the insurance companies will probably evolve to is a higher level of discounts. If you have a car that was designed to not get into accidents and we charge you X amount for this part of your coverage, for the third-party liability part of your policy, we should be able to give you a significant discount. Let’s say you get a 10% discount now for accident-free driving. Maybe that goes to 30% because it’s not likely that you’re going to be in an accident in that vehicle. So even if it costs more raw dollars to fix that car, the portion of the premium that you pay for the liability, the liability limits, perhaps you get a higher discount on that because it’s not likely that you’re going to use that part of your policy.

### So it could evolve to be cheaper as you don’t crash in the vehicle.

Yes, that could happen.

### Can we go back to the claims process? We were discussing around the lost adjustors and the shift to digital. How far can you really reduce the loss adjusting expense per policy?

Tremendously. As we evolve more into artificial intelligence, electronic claim systems, reliable third-party vendors and business partners, I can see a higher level of claims having very little, if any, human interaction. Let’s take a home example. We have a home in the Midwest, and a hailstorm goes through and damages every roof on the house on a particular street or in a particular neighborhood. There is drone technology where we can just click on a button and see the drone go over all those houses, and just by the visual you can see that every roof in that neighborhood is totaled. So if you put in the information in the computer, every home that has a hail claim with a date of loss of this date that has a roof claim, you’re going to have the computer, based on the drone technology, estimate – because all you need to do is measure it – determine the quality – and the style of roofing is very similar in the Midwest – and that check automatically goes out to the policy holder. Even further, today we have relationships with contractors where we say hey, go out and repair this roof with the exact same material, send a bill; if the bill comes in in this amount it’s automatically paid. In that example, and in some vehicle examples, too, that claim just processes itself all the way through. You don’t even need a claim adjustor.

### I think I saw that Progressive released a statistic that their loss adjustment ratio declined 30% over the last eight or nine years. Is there a limit to this? Is there a risk to declining it so much and taking out all human interaction?

You’ll limit the expense, but you won’t eliminate the severity. These terms are interesting. Severity and frequency. Frequency is the number of claims you get; severity is how much you pay. And then the third element is the expense, how much it costs the insurance company. That’s usually the largest cost. On my budget there’s two parts, one is the employee expenses and the other one is other. By far, the employee expenses outweigh all the other expenses: lease, office furniture, office supplies. It’s the salary, the medical benefits, the pension, the retirement, the payroll taxes.

### These are just call center staff to operate the claim?

Right, and a starting salary for an adjustor today, let’s just say, is $60,000 a year. A call center employee you can get for $15 an hour, and you’ll only pay them for the time they work, where the $60,000 is a salary. Whether they work or not, you’re paying them $60,000 a year, plus benefits, plus plus. But with technology you can hire a different skillset; oftentimes they’re not college educated but they’re technically savvy. They can understand the computer, they know what buttons to push. You put metrics in place that shows how many phone calls they have to make an hour, how many claims they need to process through an hour, and so you can hire out a different skillset at a lower cost which saves incredibly on the expenses.

### Take the more automated adjusting process. If this is declining 30% to 40% over the last decade, does that then enable the insurer to offer lower priced policies for those lower cost customers? Do they put that back into the customer or do they keep it themselves?

They do, but it’s like a balloon. You push on one side and it goes out the other. You can lower the cost of employees, but you need to stay up to date on technology and technology’s not cheap. We just purchased a claim system at our small company and I think it cost us around $8 million. That will probably be outdated five years from now. We’ll probably need to upgrade it or purchase a new one. We can save on the employee cost, but the trade up is that you have to stay current on technology because you don’t have the manpower, if you will, to go back to the manual process of someone that understands coverages, understands contracts, understands theories of indemnity and public policy in case law. That’s where you need the higher skillset. You still need it. I don’t think insurance companies are – I don’t want to say never – but they’re not going to be able to handle all claims with this this straight through processing. There are certain claims where, whatever you do, they’re going to fall outside the parameters of whatever you say. There’s a huge fraud element in the insurance claim industry, and there’s a huge litigation piece because there are so many attorneys and there are so many medical facilities who find ways to find little niches in the claim process where you did one little thing wrong and they file a lawsuit. It’s hard to handle litigation and fraud claims, and specialty claims, through technology.

### What percentage of total claims are the fraud and the litigation or outliers that need to be dealt with specifically?

I don’t have an exact percentage. My estimate would be 5% to 10% of claims have hard fraud in them. I say hard fraud meaning that, in an auto accident for example, someone gets rear-ended, there’s no police report, the two parties just exchange insurance information. The person in the front car that wasn’t at fault says no, I wasn’t injured, the next day you get a letter from an attorney saying there were five people in the car, all of them had severe injuries and all of them are being treated at this medical clinic in this city. That’s pretty hard fraud. That’s pretty significant.

The other fraud that is at a much higher rate, probably 30% to 40%, is just slightly increasing the value of your claim to cover your out of pocket expenses, your deductible. Take a homeowner claim; let’s say you have a theft. Someone breaks into your house and steals things. They steal your TV and your computer and your laptop. All of a sudden, you find that you have a $1,000 deductible. Oh, I forgot, they stole my gold watch that’s worth $1,000, or whatever. That happens pretty frequently and it’s kind of hard to manage, but the hard fraud is a significant problem in the insurance industry.

### How do you think data and connected cars and more data can reduce fraud?

There are things we do now because there are common elements that the hard fraudsters do. We plug those into our system. For example, if you have a claim within a short period of time after taking out a new policy or if you have multiple claims in a short period of time, there’s a red flag there. And there are others. You flag those to get some level of human intervention to see, okay, did you wreck this car before you insured it? Or, you have 11 claims in the last six months because you’ve seen how the process works and you just keep the claim within the parameters where you’re automatically getting paid; that’s a problem. That’s always going to need some level of human intervention. AI plays a role in that, but it can’t solve it completely.

### With this shift then to almost completely automate the service or make it a self-serving claims process, don’t all the benefits just trickle down to the consumer? Because all of the insurers can follow these changes. Arguably, you can’t really build a competitive advantage from these changes.

You can, depending on the size and your revenue. AI and technology are quite expensive and smaller insurance companies aren’t as competitive as such as the larger ones, because of that concept I mentioned earlier; they have so much surplus to invest they can lower their premium or use that excess money to purchase technology. Or, other companies, smaller companies, they operate on a very, very thin margin so it’s difficult to invest in very, very expensive technology.

### Take Geico versus Progressive, they all have enough capital to roll out this technology. Looking forward 10 years, do you think they would all have somewhat similar claims processes with a high level of automation and data and digital focus? Can you really get an advantage from the big insurers?

No, they should be similar. They should be similar. There are some large companies, for example USAA, which is a company in the United States that only insures US military, current, past or present. Their business model is very unique because when you segment the population to military, you can much better predict where their losses are going to be. Take another example – I’d be crazy to do this – where you only insure male drivers between age 16 and 21. That’s the worst category of drivers out there, so your margin is going to be thin and you’re not going to be able to be competitive. Or in the homeowner market, Florida is a very volatile homeowner market, as are Texas and Louisiana, because every year you can expect hurricanes to come through. Whereas if you insure someone in Idaho or Wisconsin, or Oklahoma, they do have some hail, but it doesn’t total the house. So if you’re a company and you choose to only do business in the state of Florida, it’s going to be very hard to offset those losses, where State Farm and Geico and Progressive, they insure throughout the whole United States, or most of it. They can take some of their premiums that they get in lower-loss states like Idaho and offset some of the losses that they get in Florida.

### So there’s a scale advantage there for the big players, in diversifying the risk.

Yes, exactly. Exactly. Law of large Numbers. You insure a lot and there will be some in there with a very, very low loss ratio. But they have to have insurance because they have a mortgage on their house, or they have a lien on their vehicle and the banks won’t let them go uninsured. They have to have an insurance policy to protect the lien holder. So they still need insurance but the chances of loss are lower.

State Farm started back in 1922 on a concept in Bloomington, Illinois, which is a very small town, 150,000 people. The founder of the company worked for an insurance company that insured farmers and people in Chicago and other bigger cities. The farmers were paying the same amount of insurance as the people living in the city, and this guy, he said wait a minute, this doesn’t make sense. The farmers drive tractors 90% of the time. They do have a pickup truck, but often they don’t even take it off the farm. They’re using it to move bales of hay, etc. They should pay a different rate from the people in the city. The insurance company he was at said no, we’re not going to do that. If you think that’s a good idea, why don’t you start your own company? So he did. He started State Farm Insurance, which is the largest insurance company in the world, and it was based on that concept. It’s grown astronomically, and they still have rates for rural, urban, Manhattan, where you don’t have a car, but you live in an expensive place, or Miami, Florida, that’s going to get a hurricane every year. So there are different tiers at different premiums, which really modernized the insurance concept.

### Looking at the non-loss adjusting operating expenses of a claim, what are the major buckets of that claim cost per policy that’s not actually the adjustment cost?

Salaries; and litigation costs are huge. That’s my responsibility, I have a group that just handles litigation. When we get sued by an insured, they sue you for breach of contract, which means they have a policy of insurance that covers their car, and they think you should have paid them $10,000 on their car and you only paid them $2,000. They’ll say, I’m going to sue you for $8,000. There’s a second element of that that’s almost in every state in the United States – some are worse than others but almost every place has it – called bad faith, it’s punitive damage. They’ll say, not only did you not pay me the $10,000, you intentionally paid me only $2,000 to cheat me because of X. I’m a woman, I’m a person of color, I’m not educated. For whatever reason, we’re going to make up this case that you did it. We have to hire an attorney to defend the insurance company in that and those fees are probably $250 to $300 an hour. And the courts in the States, especially in places like California, you won’t get a case to trial in California for five or six years, easy. So you’re defending a case for five years with depositions and interrogatories and discovery. It’s not uncommon to drive up $100,000 in defense costs on a claim that you only took a $1,200 a year premium on.

### Why don’t you just total it?

You can’t, because once there’s a dispute and they file a lawsuit, they’re not asking for $8,000 anymore.

### But do you think that it makes it an incentive to the insurer to just total the car anyway, in the beginning?

That’s a good concept, to err on the side of the insured. So if it’s reasonable, and it’s a little bit more than what you thought you owed, it’s better to pay it now than not. The problem there is, especially for the bigger guys, is that’s a real slippery slope. So if the bad players, as I’ll call them, but some attorneys – not all attorneys are bad, I’m not suggesting that – are out to look for those little chinks in your armor. If you’re willing to pay $3,500 on a $3,000 claim, now they’re going to ask for $4,000, then $4,500, and they just continue to pump, pump, pump. You can’t say, you’re going to pay more than you owe on a claim because if you do, you’re going to get nailed on the other side. It’s just hard to put that genie back in the bottle.

### Does the insurer look at the total loss almost as an NPS driver as well? If I take an insurance policy and I crash my vehicle, I don’t want to be hanging around with a rental car waiting for it to get fixed. I just want to be paid and get a new one. Does that drive the loss frequency?

Oh, it does, and that’s where controls come in and that’s where a good quality claim adjustor comes in because they have to look at the value of totaling it versus the value of repairing it. We call it a tweener. If it’s over 70%, we’re going to total all those vehicles. Let’s say it’s 60%, you’ve got to make a decision there. It’s the option of the insurance company to repair or replace. So we would tell you we’re going to repair that vehicle. If a vehicle goes in for repair and it takes two or three weeks – with some companies, like Volkswagen, it’s sometimes hard to get parts – the insured is sitting in a rental car like you say, and there are limits on rental car coverage so you might only have 10 days with a rental. Now you’re into a disputed situation. The insured is saying, wait a minute, I just want a new car; I have to pay my own rental car now. But the insurance company is saying no, we don’t owe you that much money and it’s going to take a little bit longer to fix your car, but that’s our option.

Another challenge comes when that car is fixed. Let’s say in three weeks, you get it back and say, uh, something’s not right with it. It just doesn’t sound right, it just doesn’t turn right, it just doesn’t have that new car smell, whatever it is; now you’re back into a new dispute. You take it in for another repair and it goes back and forth and back and forth and two months later you total the car. You’ve spent all this money to fix it and yes, that’s where a good adjustor knows, okay, this is not going to be worth it. This is a 12-year-old car. The value of it is pretty close to what it would cost to repair it. Just don’t mess with it.

### I believe that the ratio of when you total the vehicle has consistently decreased over the years. How much further could it decrease?

It changes over time. If we take a 2020 Mercedes, let’s say a $50,000 car that has $10,000 in damage. If you take it to the right shop, or let’s say you take it to a dealer, it’s pretty likely that they’re going to be able to fix it. They’ve got the new parts, hell, the car is only six months old. You take a 12-year-old car or a 20-year-old car, those parts might not be available anymore. You might have to go to Mexico or Canada or something to after-market these parts.

### You can just salvage that, right? I guess it’s in the middle as well; it’s the three or four-year-old car which is the tricky part.

Right, four, five, six, seven-year-old cars because, maybe not all but most cars, depreciate in value fairly significantly; maybe 20% when you drive a new car off the lot. Very few cars appreciate in value. Maybe a brand-new Corvette because they’re on back order for eight months, but most cars depreciate, and so the older it is the less likely you’re going to be able to fix it. The older it is, it’s going to be worth less, so it’s more likely you can pay for a total loss. That brings a whole other element called valuation, and there are third parties out there that put together valuation tools because a 10-year-old Ford pickup truck might be worth a certain dollar amount if it’s in this condition, and a certain dollar amount if it’s in that condition. But take a car that’s stolen, you don’t have the car anymore. All you’re doing is relying on the insured. How many miles were on it, what’s the condition of the outside, was it a smoker in there – that decreases it – how was the interior, did they have cats and dogs that tore it up? If they say it was in pristine condition, then you’re dealing with just negotiating on it. So I don’t know.

### And how do you see the retention of customers change as we move from the more manual adjusting process and claims process to the digital automated process?

The biggest factor with retention is generational. I mentioned earlier that I have three kids that came down for the weekend. My oldest son is 27, my middle daughter is 25, and my youngest is 22. I’ve been in insurance for their whole life. All three of them look at one thing for insurance and it’s price. My dad and my mom were with State Farm Insurance forever, for 50, 60 years, because they developed a relationship with a State Farm agent and they trusted that that agent was always going to protect their insurance needs, whether it be vehicle, home, life, nowadays banking and finance. My kids today, they don’t want an agent. They don’t want to talk to anybody. They just want to click on a link and email me or text me the policy. I’m not going to read it; I just want it so I can show the police that I have it when I get pulled over. So retention today is much more challenging, where 20 to 30 years ago it was more relationship-based with agents and company. I trust that company, I know that Geico or Farmers is going to have the financial wherewithal where even if an earthquake decimates California, they’re still going to have enough money to pay every client. Or if a brushfire goes through and damages 5,000 homes, they’re going to have the financial backing to pay my client. Where for my kids it’s like, yes, my car’s worth six grand, whatever.

### The larger players that can reinvest back in price can have a real advantage in the new generation.

They can, if they choose to do that. Some of them are stuck in their own ways. I use the analogy that some of the big guys are like 600-foot freight ships in the ocean. They’re going across the ocean, and some technology comes, and they say wait, hold everything, we’re going to put the technology in. It might take that freightliner two miles to stop, but if you’re in a 15-foot center console boat, you can woot, jam the reverse and change course.

### How can a pure digital player like Root or Lemonade really compete with the larger insurers?

I’m not convinced, and I don’t want to defame or say anything negative about them because I’ve never been involved with them, I’ve never talked to them, but generally speaking, those types of companies, my concern is, are they in it for the long haul. Are they trying to make as much money as they can early on and then, in effect, fold the tents? All right, some government agency will take over that and pay those claims, or the lenders will come in. Generally, they don’t have much infrastructure; they outsource everything, from the acquisition to the distribution to the service to the underwriting to the pricing to the rating. If you outsource everything, when you’re relying on third-party vendors, you’re not going to pick the most expensive one. You’re an up and comer, you’ve got to save as much as you can. So how reliable are you? How strong are your pricing models? If you’re setting a rate and you don’t fully understand loss ratios or what kinds of losses to expect, and you overshoot that and your losses come in higher than the money than you took in, you’re in trouble.

The other thing with those companies that I see is they don’t have large marketing platforms. If you look at a Geico or Progressive in the US, they have these whole stories around the gecko. It’s a little green lizard. If you see a little green lizard, the first thing you think of is Geico Insurance. If you think of Flo, who is on every commercial for Progressive over here – she’s a young lady who is kind of cute and quirky – when you see Flo, oh, Progressive. If I’m thinking of insurance, who am I going to get an insurance policy from? Oh, Geico, I saw a commercial for them. I don’t think of Lemonade. You don’t see them on the internet, you don’t see them on TV, you don’t see them on billboards.

### But they’re also probably trying not to acquire you as well, to a certain extent. If I saw them it’d obviously be down to price, but they really can’t compete with the likes of Geico or Progressive. Do these companies mainly outsource their claim process?

Absolutely.

### So that would be a third-party contractor that would be running the call center and they would process the claim.

And there are all kinds of companies like that, all over. Today, we outsource a portion of our claims, but we have our own internal claim staff that handles most of our claims. State Farm, Geico and Progressive, they outsource some of their claims but to do all of it, how do you control fraud? How do you control your loss ratio? How do you know you’re paying claims that you actually owe? You could put some metrics in place but when you outsource the whole thing, you’re giving up a lot of control on that process and how do you know you’re paying the right amount?

### What advantage could Root or Lemonade have or even the new one, Metromile, that’s recently listing?

Without an infrastructure, without insourcing, their fixed costs, I would imagine, are very, very competitive. If you have an overall expense ratio of 35% or 40%, which a lot of the big companies do – 42%, 44% – that’s pretty significant. If you can reduce it to 10%, you should be very competitive on price. But how do you get your product to people? How do you get your name out there? I guess you can go on the internet and put it into a search engine that comes up if someone googles auto insurance, that you’re one of the top three that comes up, you could do some of that. You could do some of that technology, but you’re not going to be doing commercials and marketing and all that stuff. One advantage they could have is just sheer expense ratio, a lower expense ratio.

### They might be able to outsource the claims but then it just comes back to distribution for them and acquiring customers at a certain price?

Yes, I think their cost could be a benefit; I think their acquisition and marketing is a huge challenge. How do they get their business?

### What defines a great claims customer experience, today in a digital world?

A great claim experience is just that. An experience. Being a claims adjustor is an admirable profession and the good claim adjustors are very valuable. They’re like gold. Those are the ones that really understand the value of a relationship. I tell this story all the time, especially to the newer folks coming into the company. It’s okay to have a different process. So for my son who damages his car, the only thing he wants to hear from you is a text or an email or a Snapchat or an Instagram or whatever. He wants one link to send it to a body shop, he wants a rental car delivered to his house, and they’d bring his car back to you when he’s done. He never wants to talk to you.

My mom is 86 years old, has all of her faculties and everything, but she needs handholding. She needs to understand what’s going to happen in this process. Right now, I’m going to talk to you and have you tell me the story. Tomorrow I’m going to send someone out to pick up your car. Wednesday, the car is going to be at a body shop. Thursday, they’re going to start the repair. Then you have to call her every day and say, okay, I just want to let you know we’re still here and we’re going to help you. That’s gold. That’s value, because you get the benefit of both worlds. You get the ones that understand the empathy part of the job and when you need to assert yourself and when you need to backout and let the process just go unhindered.

Some people aren’t able to do that. They say I want a set of rules and I want to do it on every single claim, and that’s a problem. That’s when your claim process goes awry. Because if you don’t handhold my mom in that example, she’s going to complain. And she’s going to complain in either the insurance department, or she’s apt to get a lawyer and say hey, I’m not going to handle this, I’ll just get someone else to handle it for me, and then your costs go up. So in my opinion, it’s the relationships and the empathy part of claim adjustors.

### Who has the best claims process out of the big four or five insurers in the US?

I would have said State Farm, 20 years ago because they’re, well, State Farm – Allstate and Farmers were probably similar – and because State Farm had a motto called, ‘The Good Neighbor.’ The concept was you have a local agent and the local agent is able to handle any claim you have that’s under $1,000. All you needed to do was drive down to your agent’s office, show him your repair bill and he’ll write you a check. But the claim adjustors go through tremendous training. I went through a two-week basic claims school, and six months later an advanced claims school, and a management school. They are two-week schools and the training that you get is incredible. You get some contract training, you get policy language training, you get roleplay training, where smaller companies, they don’t invest in training at all. They’ll rely on former insurance employees who left an insurance company. They’ll say, okay, just pick it up and run with our company. The challenge you get on some of those is inconsistencies, and inconsistency is bad in an insurance claim business. That’s when you run the risk of class action lawsuits and all kinds of problems.

Probably the State Farms, Allstate, Farmers are the better ones. The problem is, over the last five years, the claim adjusting has gone from a profession to a call center. They’ve lost a lot of the relationship and those behavioral type things, and they’ve lost the relationship between agency that sells the policy and claims that service the policy. I don’t know where that’s going to go in the next 10 years; will they be able to get that back or not? But all insurance – if you get it through an agent or you get it through the internet – is a promise. You’re not getting anything tangible. You’re getting a promise that we’re going to be there to pay for your claim in a time of need. When you lose that concept and you turn into a commodity, just a set of rules that says here’s what we’re going to do on every single claim, you lose that service. I guess if the general public gets to a point where they accept that, that it is just a commodity and then I get treated badly when I have a claim, but I’m not going to pay that much for it, well maybe that’s where it goes.

### What’s the impact, Todd, on that misalignment or distortion between the claims adjustor service and the agent selling the claim and how that’s changing? How is that going to impact the industry in the big insurance companies?

There’s the potential risk of eliminating the agent in the process. For many, many years, an insurance agent was a very lucrative position. Let’s say you sell an auto policy for $1,000 a year. Their commission on that policy might be 5%. If you sell 100,000 of those policies, they get that 5% commission, and every year thereafter, they get a renewal commission. So that is a high, high cost for an insurance company. Think about the situation if you could eliminate that commission and just have the acquisition process through the internet, technology, an app or whatever?

### Which is why Geico is so effective?

Well, you’d be surprised. Geico still sells a lot of their insurance through agents, they’re just not captive agents. State Farm, for example, is a captive agency force. They have 17,000 agents, and those contractual relationships between the agents and State Farm allow those agents to only sell State Farm insurance. There’s a whole other group of insurance just called general brokers, and those brokers can sell anyone that will take their insurance. State Farm does not take insurance from those brokers; I don’t think Allstate does either. But Geico take business from about 50,000 agents throughout the US. So an independent broker has the ability to look at Geico, Liberty Mutual, Church Mutual, some of the companies that rely on general brokers. They’ve got the ability to say, how much do you want to pay for insurance and the person will say, I can only afford $150 a month. They can go through and find a company that fits that, and they say, I can place you at this company. So those agents will probably still be around, unless a higher percentage of people purchase insurance just through the internet, without an agent. Some people won’t do that today. Some people will, some people won’t, but that’s generational. As my children grow and the generation after them grows, it’s acceptable to just get insurance by pushing a button and getting an app. I’m good!

### But then what does that mean in terms of the planes of competition for the industry?

So that changes the claims dramatically. Take homeowner insurance, for example. There are parameters at a company and their business model is, we will not insure a home that is over 30 years old, so you can predict the claims. Then another company says, we’re not going to have a restriction on age or size or condition, and we’re not going to inspect the property before we insure it. It’s likely that they’re going to get a lot of claims on a 50-year-old home because the plumbing is worn out, the electrical is burnt out, it’s an old roof. A slight gust of wind blows the roof off because it’s 50 years old and it’s rotten. That claims process becomes more complex because is it an accident that caused the damage to that old roof or old car, or is it wear and tear? Because the policy you purchase is not a maintenance policy. It’s an accident policy that only pays when an accident happens. If an old pipe wears out, you can’t submit a claim and say, hey, I want you to replumb my house. No, that’s just the maintenance. That what a home warranty policy is for, not an insurance policy.

### What do you think is the biggest risk for the Progressives or Geicos of insurance in the next 10 years?

Market share is probably the biggest thing they need. And reputation could impact market share, so that’s always a challenge. Litigation is a huge challenge. I mean, it’s so expensive. Technology also.

### What’s the risk to market share? Take Geico, for example, unless they shift their claims process more towards automation, what would be a big risk for them in losing market share? Because that should make them then reinvest back into lower prices to maintain their position.

That’s correct. I’ll tell you another one that could impact is if you don’t spread the risk properly. For example, if you just insure in Florida and let’s say there are three category five hurricanes in one season that wipe out 50% of the houses, and you don’t have enough surplus. Catastrophe is always a volatile claim to the future of an insurance company. You really have to plan for that; you have to be responsible. If you have $90 billion, like State Farm does, in surplus, you’ve got to be careful to keep $50 billion of it in there just for protection of catastrophe. Sometimes CEOs and CFOs and chairmen of boards invest, like Allstate; they’re not a mutual company. They have stockholders, so their stock price is impacted. State Farm is a mutual company and they give dividends. If you give too many dividends and don’t keep enough in surplus, all of those things, I think will continue to be factors in the next decade or two.

### Last question around really summarizing the core change in the claims process and what you’d suggest us to really focus on over the next five years for the big insurance companies. What is really important?

I think it’s important to take advantage of technology but be mindful of it, and have a really, really good IT person, or a chief strategy officer because, as I said before, technology is expensive. There are companies that just jump at every shiny penny out there, and every time a system gets a little bit better, they’re going to buy that one. Some have the forethought to say okay, what we purchased last year is still sufficient and it’s still getting the job done at a pretty high level; let’s wait on the next edition. Some people buy every brand-new iPhone that comes out, but the iPhone 8 still has a lot of the technology that most people need, that my mom needs. My mom would never need an iPhone 11 or 12; an 8 is plenty for her. So insurance companies need to have that balance between technology and saving money.

The other thing, I would think, from an operations or claims standpoint is training. They have to continue to invest in training, because you can have the best technology in the world, but if you don’t have human intervention on certain claims, that could potentially impact market share. You start losing customers that say you don’t care about me anymore.

### That’s especially the customers that go for the agent.

Right.

### So as we see agent distribution decline, that’s going to also accelerate the shift to an automated claims process?

Right.

### And the agents will stick to that. They want to grab onto that business, which I think is an interesting point around how the industry is moving away from agent distribution. This also means it’s moving away from relationship-based business and therefore it becomes more of a technology company, and can beat the price, which changes the landscape completely.

It does, because what you’re insuring, especially in property and casualty, on an auto, is people purchase something. At least in America, people love their cars, and even though it’s a five-year-old Ford 150 pickup, it’s my pickup and I put my love and care into it. I polish it, I wax it, etc. These people don’t want to be treated like, whatever, it’s just a truck, I’ll give you this. But a home, they invest in their home, they keep it up, they’ve improved it, they paint it and garden. If you’re going to treat them like it doesn’t matter, it’s just a roof, it’s just a house, who cares, they’re going to say, wait a minute, I’m paying you all this money for a premium and you’re treating me like you couldn’t care less. I’m just a number, not a real person, not a real profit.