# AWS: Culture, EC2, EBIT Margins & Market Share Outlook

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Can you provide a bit of context to how you first joined AWS?

I joined around mid-2012 and I think, back then, the idea of cloud was growing but still was not the established way to do things. When I joined, it had a much narrower list of services. I think it only included 10 or 12 of the more core offerings like EC2, S3, RDS, I think Elastic MapReduce was the new thing, but it was not the household name that it is today. It was not clear that Amazon web services was going to be the incumbent in the cloud space. It was pretty interesting because everything was growing quickly and everyone was figuring it out as we went. If you joined AWS in 2022 you would really narrowly focus on one or two services but joining at that time, if you are in any sort of customer-facing role like a support engineer, you learnt it all so I think it was a great time to join because you got foundation in all of the cloud services and it was not too overwhelming yet.

### Before we dig in to the stack, I noticed that you were at Amazon for a long time, much longer than other people we have come across. What made you stay there so long?

I really fell in love with the platform and the mission there was always something interesting to me, so I was always genuinely interested in the technology. I think that as it grew and specializations became required, I found a lot of satisfaction as I started to specialize in some of these services, and being able to be a subject matter expert in some of those things I thought it was very rewarding. At a company like Amazon, there are so many things you can work on and the skills that you have in one domain are applicable in another. There is always a chance to move laterally and focus on something else. You do not always have that kind of opportunity at other companies that are more focused on one specific technology. You could pivot your career entirely if you wanted to and that is what kept me interested.

### Why does it seem that Amazon has quite a high employee churn?

It is a tough place to be, and I do not mean that in a negative way; I just mean it is a high pressure-high stakes organization. For Amazon to be as good as it is at hosting cloud services and have the best reliability and, effectively, triage all these different issues that customers run in to and manage the complexity of the scale that they are operating at, there is a lot of operational rigor and that is really stressful for the average person. Certain people thrive in that environment while other people struggle with it. If you are an on-call engineer, for example, that is a really stressful place to be. I have been there and you have the weight of the world on your shoulders so that could take a toll on your mental health if you are not prepared for that level of intensity at certain times. But it is very team dependent and the experience you have at Amazon varies depending on where you are and I think that operational excellence, that rigor and that structure exists everywhere in different intensities.

### When you mean operational excellence and rigor, how would you define what is expected?

Amazon is the most customer centered organization in the world and, for some folks, that is a marketing point but it is also actually true internally. You are always thinking about the best thing you can do to give the customer at any given time. In all the operational decisions that happen in the way that you think about rolling out new features or replicating/migrating customers across things, there is just a lot of thought in to what is the right way to do it, so you cannot take any shortcuts. There is also the realization that Amazon is hosting services for massive companies that have very high expectations themselves. There are banking platforms, social media and a lot of stuff that cannot go down. Amazon takes the responsibility of hosting these things very seriously and I think that that awareness and making sure that operationally they are very sound is just built in to the DNA of the organization.

As an example, there are processes and cadences internally where you review issues and changes which are not just reviewed by your team but by your VP that owns multiple teams. Or even, previously, by Charlie Bell who was one of the SVPs there that had a very high operational bar. If your team had a major issue, eventually, Charlie Bell would see that issue and you would get questioned in front of a room full of people. Why did you have that issue and what was the nature of it? How are you going to prevent it again? It was through the lens of, how do we learn from this mistake and get better and continue to raise the bar of our operations for our customers who really trust us and rely on us for the highest level of service.

### When you mention that it is intense, is it because the teams are relatively small and there is not much capacity or more because they are really rigorous in how they measure you and the KPIs they use?

It is a combination of both. There are unique elements; as there are so many customers there is a high volume. If you are a product manager or an engineering manager, you have a large burden in terms of supporting the sales and talking to potential customers. You are also supporting your existing customers. The support engineering team eats a lot of your time and then you are dealing with service operational issues, you are having to continuously roll out features; it is just multifaceted in all of the things you have to do.

I would say it is a combination of two to three things. Firstly, sheer volume of customers, whether existing or potential. Secondly, the high operational rigor. If you are shipping a feature, it has all these requirements you have to go through in terms of technical security and operational validation so there is a fairly high burden to launch stuff because you have to meet that bar. The last one is that Amazon likes to move at a very high speed so you have to get everything right and you have to also do it quickly. That is kind of a unique challenge if you are used to prioritizing just getting the feature correct or getting it out quickly. You really have to get both correct when launching a major feature or service for Amazon.

### How do you see Amazon’s attractiveness as a place to work for top engineers today versus in the past?

I never thought it was cheap in terms of hiring practices and compensation was always market or above. I have never worked in Google but there was a contrast in folks that came from Google to work for Amazon in terms of, you never get your laundry done, there is no free food. You will go to the re:Invent conference every year and you will see executives sitting in the back of the plane; they are not flying business class, so there is none of the excessive perks that define some of those real Silicon Valleyesque companies. There is a lot of cost conciseness on things that do not matter but I never thought that they were skimping intentionally on talent. I think it was very difficult to hire sufficiently quickly and that is why early service teams would lag a little bit at first in terms of numbers. When you were launching something new, there was always the pressure to try to launch it with as small a team as possible and it is a very prudent thing to do. It is definitely a different culture in terms of what they spend money on and what they prioritize.

I think it depends on your priorities. Amazon is still a great thing to have on your resumé and I feel like the career development from working there is succeeding and you really absorb a lot of these practices. You see folks from Amazon continuing to be leaders and raise the bar in new organizations with a lot of the things they learnt in practice inside of AWS and I think this is good for the organization as a whole. Those skills you gain while you are there are very valuable and very applicable across the industry. From that lens, I think it is a great place to be and a great resumé item to have. I also realize that this is not everyone’s goal as they do not all want a career rocket ship; they want something that is not their primary focus.

### What about AWS’ attractiveness versus GCP and Azure?

I think you can say the same about all three companies in that there are certain organizations that are high pressure and really execution focused. I think there maybe is a reputation – I honestly do not know how true this is – that both GCP and Microsoft are cushier places to work. I do not think that is applicable to Azure, necessarily, but maybe to the rest of Microsoft. Maybe it is not a fair characterization for the companies as a whole, but I do think their reputations are very different. The average tech employee in Seattle, for example, has a certain mental image of what it is like working for Microsoft versus Amazon, versus Google, with Amazon probably being the hardest one.

### How do you look at cash and comp, overall; specifically, the cash and stock mix? There were stories around Amazon engineers not being happy especially because part of the compensation was in stock and it had not gone anywhere in a couple of years. How did you see that evolve over the past few years?

I do not think the approach to compensation changed. Until very recently, there was that base salary maximum. In Seattle, I think it was 160,000 a year which was the most you could make and they would give you a signing bonus or stock grants. For the stock grants, I think the primary complaint was that you would get 5% at the end of year one, 15% at the end of year two, 40% over year three and four. But historically, if you look from 2012 onwards, the stock performance was very good, so many folks were still very happy.

But if you looked at hiring packages across the board, I am not sure that Amazon was ever the highest. You would hear about Apple, Facebook and GCP having higher offers. I have experienced that as a hiring manager as well, where you would see other FAANG companies making offers that were considered out of band for us. I think it is good money; it could be crazy money depending on who you are, what your skills are and when you join but it is not regarded as the highest paying company out there.

### Do you think Amazon has to adapt that to compete going forward, if you have got these other companies offering bigger packages?

Most likely, it just gives them more flexibility and the ability to assemble packages that look different depending on the candidates’ preference. I think Netflix is famous for that; they pay a lot and you have your choice if you want it in cash or if you want it in stock and you can pick the mix that makes sense for you, depending on your family and requirements. I think I understand giving your hiring managers more flexibility; it just gives you more weapons, essentially.

### Moving onto the technology: can you explain, in layman’s terms, that core EC2 and S3 offering and how it works?

S3 was one of the first cloud services with AWS. Today, it is one of the first things you think about when you think of AWS. It is a block storage so it is a little bit different from block storage on a hard drive; it is a slightly different abstraction This was intended to be storage for the internet and there was a couple of things that made it really ground breaking. The pay as you go pricing model, you pay for the storage and the idea that it is extremely durable. They advertised 11 nines for durability which basically means you are more likely to be struck by lightning than lose data from that storage unit. I think this changed the possibilities for folks designing applications and was just a game changer of what was possible at that time.

You can think of S3 as storage backend for the internet; that is the way it was thought of at that time. EC2 was also a pretty early addition to how you can get virtual machines on the cloud. It is a service that provides API and UI for you to actually come in and say, I would like a virtual machine of this size. You can also pick a bunch of different characteristics like the type of storage, whether or not you want local discs attached or if you want a GPU in it and so on.

In the early days you only had a couple of options. You had Intel CPUs and you had local attached storage which, essentially, mean that that storage is only good as long as the virtual machine was running and if it rebooted you would lose the data on the storage volume. But this gave customers a very interesting way to start thinking about how they can assemble architectures and applications. You are paying for it when it is running but when it stops, you are no longer paying for that and you can start to see the genesis of auto scaling. As more traffic comes in for your applications, you launch more instances to handle that and you are only running those instances while that peak traffic is occurring. Once it decreases, you are no longer running those instances. It was a nice way to match cost to spend.

### The different SKUs and instances and the various products they offer within EC2, how does that compare to Azure and GCP’s SKU range and does this even matter?

I think it does matter and we will talk from today’s perspective. As I mentioned, in 2012, you really had a handful of instances based on Intel processors and combinations of CPU to memory, but the matrix of instance options really exploded over the past five to 10 years. You have instances that are specialized in giving you a lot of network and some that are specialized in a lot of block storage. There are also some with GPUs in them for machine learning purposes. What you see is a wide variety of different configurations that are focused on very specific workloads across the board. I think AWS is the leader in this space; just having instance configuration options did not exist elsewhere for a long time.

Now I think that playing field has probably levelled somewhat. There are still meaningful differences in the performance observed across cloud providers; Google tends to have very performant block devices whereas Azures are not quite as performant. You also see differences in network performances, so there are tangible differences. In terms of being able to get the latest Intel processor with this amount of memory and attached to a storage device, you can get that across all three clouds now. The difference is there are much more new ones today because AWS might have a certain instance type that Azure and GCP do not, and they might also have it ahead of those other two cloud providers.

That is one of the advantages you see AWS continue to have here. They are building the hardware to support these instances internally; they make the processor and they get some of the components from your major vendors out there – Intel and AMD – but they are still building the chassis and figuring out how to wrap it and distribute it across the world. They need to make sure it is available in all these regions and sufficient capacity for all these customers. It seems as if AWS can still execute very quickly so there might be still a slight edge from that perspective but my point is about their availability in general, which is pretty even across all clouds.

### When you are speaking to customers and they are migrating to the cloud, how much do they really look at the performance and the quality of EC2 versus GCP and Azure and the storage cost?

It matters to them. It is really tough to generalize and there are multifaceted reasons in choosing a cloud provider. You really do see an increase in the customers running across multiple clouds, different workloads and there are reasons for that. I think maybe it is like, no one ever got fired for buying IBM; no one is getting fired for choosing AWS these days. There is a lot of reputation that goes in to AWS being just reliable and generally having some offering that support everything you could want to do.

Let’s take a hypothetical enterprise that has no cloud expertise and no cloud footprint right now. I think AWS have a huge organization that is focused on helping customers lift and shift and get to the cloud and helping the enterprise modernize. It is not just a product question; they have a lot of services and programs that are built for customers starting from scratch. GCP and Azure also have those and there are certainly a large number of traditional Windows shops that have made the transition to Azure very easily because of Microsoft’s investment in that sort of program and services aspect. But I think AWS is a very safe choice. There is always going to be a service available for what you need and they obviously have their boots in the ground to help you get there successfully and I think they do a really good job. The final thing I will say is they do a really good job building relationships with customers, really taking in to consideration where they are and what they need helping them build on AWS successfully, over whatever time frame makes sense to them.

### There is a hypothesis that the IaaS – EC2, S3 – layer is effectively a commodity in the long run and price will decline over time, that the cloud players are moving to focus on adding value or driving profitability on the PaaS layer on top. What is your view on that?

I think that as services move up you maybe care less about the infrastructure layer but, at the same time, the quality of the infrastructure layer has implications for everything else built on top of it. Every surface is eventually running on EC2 underneath and so the reliability you have on EC2 is directly tangible. Even on something like Lambda, there are still servers behind the scenes. In general, I think that operational excellence and that culture of just being extremely reliable is extremely valuable and I do not think customers underestimate the importance of that. Those particular components might eventually become commodity but I think the service, the foundation, the reliability and perception of the cloud provider go all the way up the stack.

### Amazon today, say AWS has 30% EBIT margins, operating margins. Do you think, in that world, can you still charge a premium or earn a 30% margin if it is a commodity, potentially?

> I do not know exactly the breakdown of what the highest margin is for them, for example, but I know the more that customers that adopt Graviton, that is something that helps them with that. Obviously, you see Amazon passing a lot of those savings forward to customers, because Graviton is so much cheaper than the equivalent. But I am not really sure what drives the majority of those margins. If they keep getting better economies of scale and can drive down the cost of their instances, they can decide to take that out of margin and drive more usage. You always have to think about when you are doing pricing, is this something that is margin additive to EC2 or is it something that just drives EC2 usage. What do we actually care about here. Some of the services are built to be value add on top of EC2 and you’re paying for the value.

### Is that how Amazon really thinks about pricing and rolling out products, flexing between do I want to grab margin on Redshift or some of these PaaS services or is that just to drive volume to EC2?

Exactly; that is the model. When you are launching a service, it is what you want to think about. It comes down to, is this an adoption play or is this going to drive significant revenue and margins and how do we think about where the revenue should actually come from. It is perfectly valid to say this is something that just accelerates the growth of EC2 whereas other services are, obviously, offering more additional values which they are charging accordingly.

### Looking at EC2, one of the big questions for Amazon shareholders or one of the big risks is, let’s say, in 10 years’ time, let’s just assume that a lot of the value is captured on top for Amazon and these players such as Redshift, at the PaaS layer. If we do see more companies like Snowflake or some of these best of breed vertical SaaS businesses coming in and taking share in that PaaS layer, where does that leave Amazon?

First of all, I think the pie is so big that there is space for multiple successful competitors. But there is one way of looking at it that there is this customer persona that wants to consume everything whether it is the PaaS or infrastructure from one vendor; they want to go through Amazon. They’ll take the Amazon variant of a given service type; they’ll take the Amazon Elastic search because it is a commodity for them. They do not really care and they would rather just work with one vendor and have support through one channel. I think that will continue to be the case. There is this AWS in the bubble sort of play where we do not have to step outside of this; we just have to pay Amazon. We consume their services; we are done.

But there are certainly a growing number of customers that prefer companies that are very specialized and have a more expansive offer like Snowflake, like you mentioned. MongoDB is another good example. Many customers would prefer to consume Mongo through the company that built the software because the expert at running it has a dedicated cloud service, rather than going through Amazon’s DocumentDB. Maybe Mongo is a huge component of their stack and they really need top tier support and the best in breed offering there.

There is always going to be a market for both the Amazon service, which might not be as extensive in features and it might not have the same level of support necessarily, but it fits the bill for the Amazon native customer. They just care because it checks the box. But there is definitely appetite for the Snowflakes and Mongos of the world where they are doing one thing and doing it extremely well. You are just not going to get that anywhere else I think it is interesting because, at the end of the day, there is a flywheel and an ecosystem in play because Snowflake drives EC2 revenue.

Ultimately, from Amazon’s perspective, that is why they invest so heavily in the partner ecosystem, because generally, in many cases a customer wants to be on AWS primarily but choose Snowflake for their data warehousing. That is a completely acceptable situation. Amazon has a strong relationship with some of these vendors and they have very preferential treatment in that they are just like any other customer. They get a discount on certain volume pricing, they get a lot of direct support from account managers and architects working with them, making sure that everything is working well. Amazon invests heavily in the success of these partners because it is that ecosystem.

### But from an overall profitability perspective, if that customer wants to use Mongo and go away from DocumentDB, Amazon keeps EC2 or might increase its EC2 revenue and usage but may lose the DocumentDB margin. What does that do to long run AWS margins?

I do not know the pricing model for this particular example, but you are right. I guess the counter argument would be, does the customer with Snowflake end up driving larger aggregate volumes of EC2, by investing more in that sort of platform.

### It is like a 10 or 20 year adoption play, just to drive more workload to EC2 in the cloud and drive economies of scale.

> That is definitely one of the main focuses. EC2 is obviously one of the largest businesses inside of the company. Everyone is consuming some degree of EC2 and, as long as that keeps growing, the company has great prospects. But you do see services like S3 and DynamoDB, in particular, becoming the standard for developers. If you are looking at a NoSQL database or if you are looking at an object store, you do see continued growth in a lot of these value-added services on top of it. I do not think there is a huge risk of commodification, in general, just because there are so many value-add services on top that seem to be really the incumbent in a certain space. At least from a developer’s perspective, this is what I would use.

### Everyone talks about how early we are in terms of workloads moving to the cloud – 5% to 6%, whatever it is the number of the time – are there any major limitations in your mind that would prevent the lift and shift for some workloads?

Yes, we did see some difficulty. Some are, admittedly, a little bit out of the loop in terms of the Windows ecosystem and containers, but I know that there was a lot of friction from folks to really get to the point where they were comfortable with it. I feel like there was some challenges. As an example, maybe you had some library or some framework updates that had to happen and maybe need to do a .NET core, or you had to port to some of the newer versions of Windows.

A lot of the existing Windows applications had a higher barrier to entry to move to containers, if that makes sense. Even amongst customers who had the domain expertise running a lot of Linux containers, when they started thinking about doing Windows, I think there was a lot of hesitancy and just not a lot of best practices around because there was just more application refactoring. It wasn't as easy as just containerized lift and shift, which you could do with any Linux app effectively. I think Windows has probably made some strides. But I do wonder if we'll ever see similar levels of adoption in the Windows space, as far as containers go. In comparison to Linux, it's just a different burden. I think that skill set might not be just as prolific or distributed as it is for Linux. I'm definitely speaking from a perspective that's probably two years out of date as far as Windows goes. But at that time, I think we saw that was an area where there was a lot of opportunity, but there was a lot of friction and a lot of maturity in that space that had to happen before we get there.

### Roughly, what was the percentage of workloads on EKS that was Linux versus Windows?

I don't have those numbers; I'm just guessing. I would say it was 98% Linux. Windows was very nascent at that time and I think you were definitely in better shape if you were writing net new applications, based on Windows to be containerized. The newer frameworks are sort of required to be able to do that. But if you had legacy Windows applications, you were very bleeding edge, if you were considering moving those to containers and replatforming them effectively. There's just a lot more work to be done, especially in terms of maturity of the tool chain and the knowledge that was available to you on how to do this.

### Are they ever going to shift if you're on .NET or these old systems? Is that just a fiction that these are going to shift over, or we're just going to see a migration in the mix of new workloads just increasing as a percentage of total?

> It's a great question. I really am bad at predicting the future on this. On one hand, eventually, you're going to have to get off of these older systems, and you're going to have to move them to more modern tech stacks, because you're going to run out of talent that knows how to run these things and work on them. This is a problem you see in financial services, where they've got mainframes, and they say, we’ve got two guys who know how this thing works and we need to get to something more modern. I foresee that there's probably going to be some motivation like that. But it's certainly slow. If you're a really heavy Windows shop, maybe you don't see the benefit, or you're not super motivated to move to containers.

But Microsoft has been really invested in this space and I think they've been working hard to make it possible. Just in general, in terms of moving Windows workloads to the cloud, they've invested a lot in trying to make that a lot easier. AWS has as well. I think both cloud providers sense this is an untapped market in a lot of senses. To answer your question more directly, I assume it will progress pretty rapidly, but maybe it's a higher barrier to entry, rather than the Linux space.

### This is interesting. So those old Windows, lift and shift, are they more likely to use Azure or Azure's container service, or Kubernetes versus AWS?

At one point, the talking point was AWS had far more Windows workloads than Azure. I don't know where that stacks up any longer. I'm not sure if that's been published at any point recently. Azure is obviously growing very quickly and becoming very successful. One advantage I think that they have is that – this is very anecdotal – you hear folks say, the Microsoft rep has these really long-standing relationships with these enterprises; their kids play soccer together. They have the ability to just pivot their sales approach from, we've been selling you Windows for 20 years, let's sell you Azure as part of it and help you get there. I think they definitely had an advantage. Obviously, Microsoft knows how to sell enterprise software. But in terms of Windows workloads, and Windows innovation, AWS is also no slouch. There was quite a bit of Windows running and a lot of investment in terms of helping customers migrate Windows workloads, help them modernize Windows workloads, whether that's to some sort of .NET core or Linux native endpoint or just to newer Windows OSs and migrate those apps so that they could possibly be containerized in the future.

### It's not really a limitation that when those Windows apps can be lifted and shifted? It's not the fact that Azure can be better because AWS obviously offers that already and has the experience?

That's right. I think that if you're a Windows shop, and you've been a longtime Microsoft customer, it might be very obvious to go with Azure because you already have those relationships. They're basically telling you, let's go; we'll guide you through this transition. We've done this a lot before; we know how to get you there. But there is still a large practice at AWS that's investing in Windows modernization or the professional services. There's the competency there to perform those things. This is sort of out of my domain but I know there's also a big systems integrator ecosystem that specializes in that as well. There's clearly a lot of opportunity and money made in that space. But certainly, I think I’m reaching the limits of my most current knowledge in terms of where the Windows modernization and containerization ecosystem stands; I’m a couple years out of date.

### Given that all the Linux stuff was shifting by containers, could that suggest potentially that there is this pent-up demand of old Windows apps that have not shifted by containers? Then when that does come on, that's going to fuel a big part of the shift to cloud? And then the question is, are AWS and Azure fighting over that? Or GCP?

Yes, I think that's a great prediction to make. If you looked at the percentage of the overall Linux market that's moved to containers, it's probably higher than the percentage of the overall Windows market that's moved to that. It would be interesting to know the total addressable market just out there, in the Linux space, that could be migrated versus the Windows space. I don't know if Linux just dwarfs Windows; I don't have good numbers on that.

### That would suggest that AWS, obviously, has enjoyed a huge amount of growth from that. Maybe Azure is going to benefit as these old Windows customers start getting their act together and shifting those apps over potentially.

I think it's a good bet. I think Azure realized that as part of its strategy, their existing customer base that needs to go to the cloud. That's been heavy on Windows for a long time. That's a really obvious play to go after. They've got a lot of competencies in how to do that so I think that it's a good go-to-market motion. I think it's probably quite polished and they know that they can help customers with that as one of their core competencies. AWS has always been quite tenacious on the Windows front as well, and has been running Windows VMs almost since the beginning, so supporting large Windows installations too. It will certainly be a battleground in the future.

### There's no doubt they can offer a great service. But if you're a Windows firm, you're a Microsoft firm; you're just used to it. You don't care what others are going to offer.

Exactly; maybe it's too undifferentiated at that point. It's just the maintenance of those relationships is preferential.