# Banks - A few hidden low-cost winners
The banking sector is not generally a rich mine of quality businesses, but there may be a few hidden low-cost winners in the mix. As a sector, banking combines many elements we dislike: commodity products; high leverage; regulation and government support; and cyclicality. Operationally, gross margins of banks are expressed by net interest margin, the difference between the cost of funds (to depositors or others), and the price charged for funds (to borrowers).  The margin is determined largely by uncontrollable macroeconomic conditions and available levers are often dangerous, such as charging too little interest or ignoring borrower credit risk. The latter poses an additional hidden cost: loan losses can sometimes take years to manifest. So banks can achieve high net interest margins, as well as high profits for years, not by being good bankers, but by being imprudent. (see [[Lending Business]], [[The Seven deadly sins of banking]] and [[Profile of Control Frauds]]).

Accordingly, few banks pass muster as quality investments. The few that do might be called low-cost banks, such as Wells Fargo in the US and Svenska Handelsbanken in Europe. Thanks to their strong balance sheets, they can obtain cheap capital from deposits or, in Svenska's case, through unsecured bonds and other debt securities, and make high-quality loans with demonstrably low default risks. Lower cost of funding enables a bank to underwrite less risky loans and still make a healthy margin. Combined with low operating costs, a bank can deliver good returns with lower net interest margins. Epitomizing a low-cost culture, this series of features produce a self-reinforcing virtuous cycle. 

Given the risks inherent to banking and the narrow zone of cost-consciousness necessary to qualify as a quality company, we stress [[corporate culture]] when evaluating banks. As the financial crisis of 2008 reminded everyone, the same banks seem to get into trouble repeatedly. It is unfair to blame management alone, as they come and go, but [[corporate culture]], a more permanent feature, plays an important role in banking and in other businesses. 
