# Belief Systems - The Power to Transform and the Power to Destroy

So often we're seduced into believing that events control our lives and that our environment has shaped what we are today. No greater lie was ever told. **It's not the events of our lives that shape us, but our beliefs as to what those events mean.**

It's never the environment; it's never the events of our lives, but the **meaning** we attach to the events - how we *interpret* them - that shapes who we are today and who we'll become tomorrow. Beliefs are what make the difference between a lifetime of joyous contribution and one of misery and devastation. Beliefs are what separate a Mozart from a Manson. Beliefs are what cause some individuals to become heroes, while others "lead lives of quiet desperation."

What are our beliefs designed for? They're the guiding force to tell us what will lead to pain and what will lead to pleasure (see [[The Force That Shapes Your Life]]). Whenever something happens in your life, your brain asks two questions: 
1. Will this mean pain or pleasure?
2. What must I do now to avoid pain and/or gain pleasure? 

The answers to these two questions are based on our **beliefs**, and our beliefs are driven by our **generalizations** about what we've learned could lead to pain and pleasure. These generalizations guide all of our actions and thus the direction and quality of our lives.

Generalizations can be very useful; they are simply the identification of similar patterns. For example, what allows you to open a door? You look down at a handle and, although you've never seen this specific one before, you can generally feel certain that this door will open if you turn the handle right or left, if you push or pull it. Why do you believe this? Simply, your experience of doors has provided enough references to create a **sense of certainty** that allows you to follow through. Without this sense of certainty, we would virtually be unable to leave the house, drive our cars, use a telephone, or do any one of the dozens of things we do in a day. Generalizations simplify our lives and allow us to function.

Unfortunately, generalizations in more complex areas of our lives can oversimplify and sometimes create limiting beliefs. Maybe you've failed to follow through on various endeavors a few times in your life, and based on that, you developed a belief that you are an incompetent. Once you believe this is true, it can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. You may say, "Why even try if I'm not going to follow through anyway?" Or perhaps you've made a few poor decisions in business or relationships, and have interpreted that to mean  you will always "sabotage" yourself. Of maybe in school you didn't learn as quickly as you *thought* other kids did, and rather than considering the idea that you had a different learning strategy, you may have decided that you were "learning-disabled." On another level, isn't racial prejudice fueled by a wholesale generalization about an entire group of people?

The challenge with all these beliefs is that they become limitations for future decisions about who you are and what you're capable of. We need to remember that **most of our beliefs are generalizations about our past, based on our interpretations of painful and pleasurable experiences.**

The challenge is threefold:
1. Most of us do not consciously decide what we're going to believe.
2. Often our beliefs are based on *misinterpretation* of past experiences.
3. Once we adopt a belief, we forget it's merely an *interpretation*.

We begin to treat our beliefs as if they're realities, as if they are gospel. In fact, we rarely, if ever, question our long-held beliefs. If you ever wonder why people do what they do, again, you need to remember that human beings are not random creatures: all of our actions are the result of our beliefs. Whatever we do, it is out of our conscious or unconscious beliefs about what will lead to pleasure or away from pain. If you want to create long-term and consistent changes in your behaviors, you must change the beliefs that are holding you back.

**Beliefs have the power to create and the power to destroy.** Human beings have the awesome ability to take any experience of their lives and create a meaning that disempowers them or one that can literally save their lives. Some people have taken the pain of their past and said, "Because of this, I will help others. Because I was raped, no one else will be harmed again." Or, "Because I lost my son or daughter, I will make a difference in the world." It's not something they wanted to believe, but rather, adopting this type of belief was a necessity for them to be able to pick up the pieces and move on to live empowering lives. 

We all have the capacity to create meanings that empower us, but so many of us never tap into it, or even recognize it. If we don't adopt the faith that there is a reason for the unexplainable tragedies of our lives, then we begin to destroy our capacity to truly live. 

The need to be able to create a meaning out of life's most painful experiences was observed by psychiatrist Viktor Frankl as he and other Holocaust victims survived the horrors of Auschwitz and other concentration camps. Frankl noted that those special few who were able to make it through this "hell on earth" shared one thing in common: they were able to endure and transform their experience by finding an empowering meaning for their pain. They developed the belief that because they suffered and survived, they would be able to tell the story and make certain that no human being would ever suffer this way again.

Beliefs are not limited to impacting our emotions or actions. They can literally change our bodies in a matter of moments. I had the pleasure of interviewing Yale professor Dr. Bernie Siegel. As we began to speak about the power of belief, Bernie shred with me some of the research he'd done on people with Multiple Personality Disorders. 

Incredibly the potency of these people's beliefs that they had become a different person resulted in an unquestioned command to their nervous system to make measurable changes in their biochemistry. The result? Their bodies would literally transform before the researcher's eyes and began to reflect a new identity at moment's notice. Studies document such remarkable occurrences as patients' eye color actually changing as their personality changes, or physical marks disappearing and reappearing! Even diseases such as diabetes or high blood pressure come and go depending on the person's belief as to which personality they're manifesting.

Beliefs even have the capacity to override the impact of drugs on the body. While most people believe that drugs heal, studies in the new science of psycho-neuro-immunology (the mind-body relationship) have begun to bear out what many others have suspected for centuries: our beliefs about the illness and its treatment play as significant a role, maybe an even more significant role, than the treatment itself. Dr Henry Beecher from Harvard University has done extensive research that clearly demonstrates that we often give credit to a drug, when in reality it's the patient's belief that makes the difference.



Beliefs can either give us the resolve to take action, or weaken and destroy our drive. In this moment beliefs are shaping how you respond to what you've just read and what you're going to do with what you're learning in this book. Sometimes we develop beliefs that create limitations or strengths within a very specific context; for instance, how we feel about our ability to sing or dance, fix a car, or do calculus. Other beliefs are so generalized that they dominate virtually every aspect of our lives, either negatively or positively. I call these **global beliefs.**

Global beliefs are the giant beliefs we have about everything in our lives: beliefs about our identities, people, work, time, money, and life itself, for that matter. These giant generalizations are often phrased as is/am/are: "Life is ...", "I am ...", "People are ..." As you can imagine, beliefs of this size and scope can shape and color every aspect of our lives. The good news about this is that making *one change* in a limiting global belief you currently hold can change virtually every aspect of your life in a moment! **Once accepted, our beliefs become unquestioned commands to our nervous systems, and they have the power to expand or destroy the possibilities of our present and future.**

If we want to direct our lives, then, we must take conscious control over our beliefs. And in order to do that, we first need to understand what they really are and how they are formed.

## What is a belief?

What is a belief, anyway? Often in life we talk about things without having a clear idea of what they really are. Most people treat a belief as if it's a thing, when really all it is is a **feeling of certainty** about something. If you say you believe that you're intelligent, all you're really saying is, "I feel certain that I'm intelligent." That sense of certainty allows you to tap into resources that allow you to produce intelligent results. We all have the answers inside of us for virtually anything - or at least we have access to the answers we need through others. But often our lack of belief, our lack of certainty, causes us not to be able to use the capacity that resides within us.

A simple way of understanding a belief is to think about its basic building block: an idea. There are a lot of ideas you may think about but not really believe. Let's take, for example, "I'm sexy." Now, whether it's an idea or a belief will come down to the amount of certainty you feel about the phrase as you say it. If you think, "Well, I'm not really sexy", what you're really saying is "I don't feel very certain that I'm sexy."

How do we turn an idea into a belief? Let me offer you a simple metaphor to describe the process. If you can think of an idea as being like a tabletop with no legs, you'll have a fair representation of why an idea doesn't feel as certain as a belief. Without any legs, that tabletop won't even stand up by itself. Belief, on the other hand, has legs. If you really believe "I'm sexy," how do you know you're sexy? Isn't it true that you have some **references** to support the idea - some experiences in life to back it up? Those are the legs that make your tabletop solid, that make your belief certain.


What are some of the references you've had? Maybe men and women have *told* you that you're sexy. Or maybe you look at yourself in the mirror, compare your image to that of those whom other people consider sexy, and say, "Hey, I look like them!" Or maybe strangers on the street call out and wave to you. All these experiences mean nothing until you organize them under the idea that you're sexy. As you do this, the legs make you feel solid about the idea and cause you to begin to believe it. Your idea feels certain and is now a belief.

Once you understand this metaphor, you can begin to see how your beliefs are formed, and get a hint of how you can change them as well. First, though, it's important to note that we can develop beliefs about *anything* if we just find enough legs - enough reference experiences - to build it up. 

Think about it. Isn't it true that you have enough experiences in your life, or know enough other people who have gone through tough times with other human beings, that if you really wanted to you could easily develop the belief that people are rotten and, given half a chance, would take advantage of you? 

Maybe you don't want to believe this, and we've already discussed that it would be disempowering, but don't you have experiences that could back up this idea and make you feel certain about it if you wanted to? Isn't it also true that you have experiences in life - references- to back up the idea that if you really care about people and treat them well, they are basically good and will want to help you too?

The question is: which one of these beliefs is the true belief? The answer is that it doesn't matter which one is true. What matters is which one is most *empowering*. We all can find someone to back up our belief and make us feel more solid about it. This is how human beings are able to rationalize. The key question, again, is whether this belief is strengthening or weakening us, empowering vs disempowering us on a daily basis. 

So what are the possible sources of references in our lives? Certainly, we can pull from our *personal experiences*. Sometimes we gather references through *information* we get from other people, or from books, tapes, movies, and so on. And sometimes we form references based solely on our *imagination*. The emotional intensity we feel about any of these references will definitely affect the strength and width of the leg. The strongest and most solid legs are formed by personal experiences that we have a lot of *emotion* attached to because they were painful or pleasurable experiences. The other factor is the *number* of references we have - obviously, the more reference experiences supporting an idea, the stronger your belief will be in it.


Do your references have to be accurate in order for you to be willing to use them? No, they can be real or imaginary, accurate or inaccurate - even our own personal experiences, as solidly as we feel about them, are distorted by our own personal perspective.

Because human beings are capable of such distortion and invention, the reference legs we can use to assemble our beliefs are virtually unlimited. The downside of this is that, regardless of where our references come from, we begin to accept them as real and thus no longer question them! This can have very powerful negative consequences depending upon the beliefs we adopt. By the same token, we have the ability to use imagined references to propel us in the direction of our dreams.

People can succeed if they imagine something vividly enough just as easily as if they had the actual experiences. That's because our brains can't tell the difference between something we've vividly imagined and something we've actually experienced. **With enough emotional intensity and repetition, our nervous system experience something as real, even if it hasn't occurred yet.**

Every great achiever I've ever interviewed has had the ability to get themselves to feel certain they could succeed, even though no one before them had ever accomplished it. They've been able to create references where no references existed and achieve what seemed to be impossible.

People so often develop limiting beliefs about who they are and what they're capable of. Because they haven't succeeded in the past, they believe they won't be able to succeed in the future. As a result, out of their fear of pain, they begin to constantly focus on being "realistic". Most people who constantly say "Let's be realistic", are really just living in fear, deathly afraid of being disappointed again. Out of that fear, they develop beliefs that cause them to hesitate, to not give their all - consequently they get limited results.

Great leaders are rarely "realistic". They are intelligent, and they are accurate, but they are not realistic by other people's standards. What is realistic for one person, though, is totally different from what is realistic for another person, based upon their references.


If you're going to make an error in life, err on the side of **overestimating** your capabilities (obviously, as long as it doesn't jeopardize your life). By the way, this is something that's hard to do, since the human capacity is so much greater than most of us would ever dream. In fact, many studies have focused on the differences between people who are depressed and people who are extremely optimistic. 

After attempting to learn a new skill, the pessimists are always more accurate about how they did, while the optimists see their behavior as being more effective than it actually was. Yet this unrealistic evaluation of their own performance is the secret of their future success. Invariably the optimists eventually end up mastering the skill while the pessimists fail. 

Why? Optimists are those who, despite having no references for success, or even references of *failure*, manage to ignore those references, leaving unassembled such cognitive tabletops as "I failed" or "I can't succeed." Instead, optimists produce *faith* references, summoning forth their imagination to picture themselves doing something different next time and succeeding.

It is this special ability, this unique focus, which allows them to persist until eventually they gain the distinctions that put them over the top. the reason success eludes most people is that they have insufficient references of succeeding in the past. But an optimist operates with beliefs such as **"The past doesn't equal the future."** All great leaders, all people who have achieved success in any area of life, know the power of continuously pursuing their vision, even if all the details of how to achieve it aren't yet available.

**If you develop the absolute sense of certainty that powerful beliefs provide, then you can get yourself to accomplish virtually anything, including those things that other people are certain are impossible.**

One of the biggest challenges in anyone's life is knowing how to interpret "failures".  How we deal with life's "defeats" and what we determine is the cause will shape our destinies. We need to remember that **how we deal with adversity and challenges will shape our lives more than almost anything else.** 

Sometimes we get so many references of pain and failure that we begin to assemble those into a belief that nothing we do can make things better. Some people begin to feel that things are pointless, that they're helpless or worthless, or that no matter what they try they'll lose anyway. 

These are a set of beliefs that must *never* be indulged in if we ever expect to succeed and achieve in our lives. These beliefs strip us of our personal power and destroy our ability to act. In psychology, there is a name for this destructive mindset: **learned helplessness.** 

When people experience enough failure at something - and you'd be surprised how few times this is for some people - they perceive their efforts as futile and develop the terminal discouragement of learned helplessness.

Dr. Martin Seligman of the University of Pennsylvania has done intensive research on what creates learned helplessness. In his book *Learned Optimism* he reports on three specific **patterns of beliefs** that cause us to feel helplessness and can destroy virtually every aspect of our lives. He calls these three categories **permanence, pervasiveness and personal.**

Many of our country's greatest achievers have succeeded in spite of running into huge problems and barriers. The difference between them and those who give up revolves around their beliefs about the *permanence*, or lack thereof, of their problems. Achievers rarely, if ever, see a problem as permanent, while those who fail see the problem as permanent. Once you adopt the belief that there's nothing you can do to change something, simply because nothing you've done up until now has changed it, you start to take a pernicious poison into your system. 

Eight years ago, when I had hit rock bottom and despaired of ever turning things around, I thought my problems were permanent. That was the closest thing to emotional death I've ever experienced. I learned to link so much pain to holding that belief that I was able to destroy it, and I've never indulged in it again. You must do the same. If you ever hear yourself or anyone you care about starting to express the belief that a problem is permanent, it's time to immediately shake that person loose. No matter what happens in your life, you've got to be able to believe, "**this, too, shall pass**", and that if you keep persisting, you'll find a way.


The second difference between winners and losers, those who are optimistic and those who are pessimistic, is their beliefs about the *pervasiveness* of problems. An achiever never sees a problem as being pervasive, that is that one problem controls their whole life. They always see it as, "Well, it's just a little challenge with my eating pattern." They don't see it as "I'm the problem. Because I overeat, my whole life is destroyed." Conversely, those who are pessimistic - those who have learned helplessness - heave developed a belief that because they screwed up in one area, they are a screw up!  They believe that because they have financial challenges, their whole life is now destroyed: their kids wont' be taken care of, their spouses will leave them, and so on. Pretty soon they generalize that things are out of control and feel completely helpless. Imagine the impact of permanence and pervasiveness together! The solution to both permanence and pervasiveness is to see something you *can* take control of in your life, and begin to take action in that direction. As you do this, some of these limiting beliefs will disappear.

The final category of beliefs, which Seligman calls personal, I refer to as the *problem being personal*. If we don't see a failure as a challenge to modify our approach, but rather as a problem with ourselves, as a personality defect, we will immediately feel overwhelmed. After all, how do you change your entire life? Isn't that more difficult than just changing your actions in a particular area? Be wary of adopting the belief of the problem being personal. How inspired can you get by beating yourself up?

Holding these limiting beliefs is equivalent to systematically ingesting minute doses of arsenic that, over time, build up to a fatal dose. While we don't die immediately, we start dying emotionally the moment we partake of them. So we have to avoid them at all costs. **Remember, as long as you believe something, you brain operates on automatic pilot, filtering any input from the environment and searching for references to validate your belief, regardless of what it is.**


## How to change a belief

**All personal breakthroughs begin with a change in beliefs.** So how do we change? The most effective way is to get your brain to associate massive pain to the old belief. You must feel deep in your gut that not only has this belief cost you pain in the past, but it's costing you in the present and, ultimately, can only bring you pain in the future. Then you must associate tremendous pleasure to the idea of adopting a new, empowering belief. This is the basic pattern that we'll review again and again in creating change in our lives. Remember, we can never forget that everything we do, we do either out of our need to avoid pain or our desire to gain pleasure, and **if we associate enough pain to anything, we'll change.** The only reason we have a belief about something is that we've linked massive pain to not believing it or massive pleasure to keeping it alive.


Secondly, *create doubt*. If you're really honest with yourself, aren't there some beliefs that you used to defend heart and soul years ago that you'd be almost embarrassed to admit to today? What happened? Something caused you to *doubt*: maybe a new experience, maybe a counter-example to your past belief. Perhaps you met some Russians and found out that they were people just like you, nor part of some "evil empire". I think that many Americans today feel a genuine compassion for Soviet citizens because they see them as people who are struggling to take care of their families. Part of what changed our perceptions was exchange programs in which we actually met Russians and saw how much they share in common with us. We got new experiences which caused us to *question*, interrupted our patterns of certainty, and began to shake our reference legs.

However, new experience in and of itself doesn't guarantee a change in belief. People can have an experience that runs directly counter to their belief, yet reinterpret it any way they want in order to bolster their conviction. Saddam Hussein demonstrated this during the Persian Gulf War, insisting that he was winning despite the destruction that surrounded him. 

**New experiences trigger change only if they cause us to question our beliefs.** Remember, **whenever we believe something, we no longer question it in any way.** The moment we honestly question our beliefs, we no longer feel absolutely certain about them. We are beginning to shake the reference legs of our cognitive tables, and as a result start to lose our feeling of absolute certainty. Have you ever doubted your ability to do something? How did you do it? You probably asked yourself some poor questions like "What if I screw up?", "What if it doesn't work out?", "What if they don't like me?" But questions can obviously be tremendously empowering if we use them to examine the validity of beliefs we may have just blindly accepted.

In fact, many of our beliefs are supported by information we've received from others that we failed to question at the time. If we scrutinize them, we may find that what we've unconsciously believed for years may be based on a false set of presuppositions.

**If you question anything enough, eventually you'll begin to doubt it.** This includes things that you absolutely believe "beyond the shadow of a doubt." Years ago, I had the unique opportunity of working with the U.S Army, with whom I negotiated a contract to reduce certain training times for specialized areas. My work was so successful that I also went through top-secret clearance and had a chance to model one of the top officials in the CIA, a man who'd worked his way up from the bottom of the organization. Let me tell you that the skills that he and others like him have developed for shaking another person's convictions and changing their beliefs are absolutely astounding. They create an environment that causes people to doubt what they've always believed, and then give them new ideas and experiences to support the adoption of new beliefs. Watching the speed at which they can change someone's belief is almost scary, yet it's powerfully fascinating. I've learned to use these techniques on myself to be able to eliminate my disempowering beliefs and replace them with empowering ones.

Our beliefs have different levels of emotional certainty and intensity, and it's important to know just how intense they really are. In fact, I've classified beliefs into three categories: **opinions, beliefs, and convictions.** An opinion is something we feel relatively certain about, but the certainty is only temporary because it can be changed easily. Our cognitive tabletop is supported by wobbly, unverified reference legs that may be based on impressions. Such are the nature of opinions: they are easily swayed, and usually based on only a few references that a person has focused on in the moment.

A belief, on the other hand, is formed when we begin to develop a much larger base of reference legs, and especially reference legs about which we have strong emotion. These references give us an absolute sense of certainty about something. And again, as I've said before, these references can come in a variety of forms: anything from our personal experiences to information that we've taken in from other sources, or even things we've imagined vividly.

People with beliefs have such a strong level of certainty that they are often closed off to new input. But if you have rapport in communicating with them, it's possible to interrupt their pattern of closing off, and get them to question their references so they begin to allow for new input. This creates enough doubt to destabilize old references and make room for a new belief. 

A conviction, however, eclipses a belief, primarily because of the emotional intensity a person links to an idea. A person holding a conviction does not only feel certain, but gets angry if their conviction is even questioned. A person with a conviction is unwilling to ever question their references, even for a moment. they are totally resistant to new input, often to the point of obsession.

Fervent conviction is not the exclusive property of fanatics. It belongs to anyone with a high enough degree of commitment and dedication to an idea, principle, or cause. For example, someone who disagrees strongly with the practice of underground nuclear testing has a belief, but someone who *takes an action - even an action others do not appreciate or approve,* such as demonstrating in a protest march at the facility, has a conviction.

What's the difference? Clearly, it's in the actions that one is willing to take. In fact, someone with a conviction is so passionate about their belief that they're even willing to risk rejection or make a fool of themselves for the sake of their conviction.

Probably the single biggest factor separating belief and conviction though, is that a conviction has usually been triggered by significant emotional events, during which the brain links up, "Unless I believe this, I will suffer massive pain. If I were to change this belief, then I would be giving up my entire identity, everything my life has stood for, for years." Holding the conviction thus becomes crucial to the person's very survival. This can be dangerous because anytime we're not willing to even look at or consider the possibility that our beliefs are inaccurate, we trap ourselves in rigidity which could ultimately condemn us to long-term failure. Sometimes it may be more appropriate to have a belief about something rather than a conviction.

On the positive side, convictions - by the passion they inspire in us - can be empowering because they compel us to act. Beliefs are like possessions, and convictions are simply more valued possession which allow an individual to passionately work toward either large-scale or individual completion of goals, projects, wished, and desires.

Often the best thing you can do to create mastery in any area of your life is to raise a belief to the level of conviction. Remember, conviction has the power to drive you to action, to push you through all kinds of obstacles. Beliefs can do this as well, but some areas of you life may require the added emotional intensity of conviction. 

For example, the conviction to never let yourself become overweight will compel you to make consistently healthy lifestyle choices, allowing you to get more enjoyment out of your life, and perhaps even saving you from a heart attack. The conviction that you are an intelligent person who can always find a way to turn things around can help steer you through some of the toughest times of your life.

So how do you create a conviction? 

1. Start with the basic belief. 
2. Reinforce your belief by adding new and more powerful references. For example, let's say you've decided to never eat meat again. To strengthen your resolve, talk to people who've chosen a vegetarian or vegan lifestyle: what reasons prompted them to change their diet, and what have been the consequences on their health and in other areas of their lives? In addition, begin to study the physiological impact that animal protein has. The more references you develop, and the more emotional the references are, the stronger your conviction will become.
3. Then find a triggering event, or else create one of your own. Associate yourself fully by asking, "What will it cost me if I don't?" Ask questions that create emotional intensity for you. For example, if you want to develop a conviction never to abuse drugs, make the painful consequences of drug abuse feel real to you by viewing films or, better yet, visiting a shelter to see firsthand the devastation wrought by drug abuse. If you've vowed to give up smoking, visit the intensive care wing of a hospital to observe emphysema patients confined to oxygen tents, or view an X-ray of a smoker's black lungs. These kind of experiences have the power to push you over the edge and establish true conviction.
4. Finally, take action. Each action you take strengthens your commitment and raises the level of your emotional intensity and conviction.

One of the challenges with convictions is that they're often based on other people's enthusiasm for your beliefs. So often people believe something because everybody else believes it. This is known in psychology as **social proof** (see [[Social Proof]]). But social proof is not always accurate. When people are not sure what to do, they look to others for guidance.

Using social proof is a great way to limit your life - to make it just like everybody else's. Some of the strongest social proof that people use is information that they get from "experts". But are experts always right? Think about our healers throughout the years. It wasnt' that long ago that the most up-to-date doctors believed in the curative properties of leeches! 

What's the lesson? Trusting experts blindly is not well-advised. Don't blindly accept everything I say, either! Consider things in the context of your own life; does it make sense for you?

