# Benchmarking for Success

We find that the most successful companies measure pretty much anything that can be measured but narrow their focus to match up with the goals of the enterprise. They benchmark to best-in-class peers and to those outside their own industry. They allow humility to reign.  There is always someone out there with higher margins, better growth, and a higher market valuation. In continuous improvement cultures, benchmarking can be highly motivational - where it makes sense, of course.

As for specific data that companies utilize, on average we find 8 to 12 fairly common metrics that the most successful fixate on.

At the highest level we find cash flow growth and profit growth to form a common base. Most of the best companies add an asset-return metric such as return on invested capital, but that can dis-incentivize investment and be manipulated, so it has to emphasize earning a return on new investment and allow time for that return to come to fruition. Good investments often take multiple years to really prove out. And ROIC doesn't necessarily fit at every level within every organization. Plant managers are prone to underinvest, for example, because they rarely stay in that specific role or location long enough to reap the benefits of a modernization project. So there is a risk to a one-size-fits all model. In any event, it's vital for senior leaders to be held accountable for investment decisions, particularly over the longer term. The best companies seem to have found the right push-pull on metrics, with the awareness that point-in-time targets conflict  with continuous improvement and the flywheel. The last thing an organization wants to emphasize is the "sprint to the goal line" behavior that is now so common in business. It's just not healthy, sustainable, or culturally positive.


Danaher has one of the most focused set of metrics that we have seen, perfected over many iterations. At its very foundation, Danaher is highly focused on cash flow. Two of the most celebrated CFOs in our studies, at Honeywell and Danaher, offer up cash flow as the single most important metric they fixated on day after day, quarter after quarter. That very focus, they believe, supported the success that their respective entities enjoyed. They both argue that a cash flow-focused firm typically has better risk controls, a sales organization with more price discipline, and a manufacturing organization with little choice but to embrace Lean principles. By contrast, we cite few examples of excellence in firms that focus on market share, particularly for companies well past the disruption stage.

In that context, goals for market share can be dangerous, as they often drive short-term behaviors (sometimes unethical) with long-term risks. Consider BlackBerry, which maximized sales of its handheld units above all else, dedicating its cash and management attention accordingly. Or consider GE: During GE's entire fall from grace, including near bankruptcy twice in a decade, it was a share gainer. Jeff Immelt cited share gains as proof that the strategy was working, all while the underlying foundation of the company was floundering. And clearly Boeing's race to beat Airbus and get the 737MAX out the door led to regretful oversights and mistakes.

In some fast-growing, immature industries, market share might make some sense, as when Google, Apple, or Amazon invests in growth to achieve network effects on its platform. But network effects are isolated to a few disparate examples where they can lead to outsized profits down the road. For 99 percent of businesses out there, pricing a contract at or below cost, or allowing a customer to defer cash payments, brings eventual pitfalls. We find few examples where the strategy actually works past a company's early disruption phase. Some industrials have succeeded with razor/razor blade  models that warrant selling up front at just above cost. But these businesses require long-term service revenue streams protected by intellectual property. More and more, the bloom is off that nose. Network effects can prove fleeting, and the US government has threatened to investigate tech firms that have acquired outsized power with this strategy. Countries in Europe and Asia have promised to follow suite.


In the end, every company has its unique circumstances. Different levels of competition, different levels of maturity. But we find no precedent of long-term success for a company that is not highly focused (with incentives) around the cash flows of the business itself. And we find little push back to the argument that even in the tech world, the top performers are absolute cash flow machines.

The best companies not only measure and compensate based on most relevant metrics, they do so every single with "daily management." A retired Danaher executive once told us, "Even in Danaher's best-run businesses we had challenges, literally problems that pop up every day." He went on to say that there wasn't one single day in his 25-year tenure that he didn't have to fix "something." Whether that was an unhappy customer, a supplier issue, a product-quality issue, or an employee doing something stupid, much of a leader's job is about finding and fixing those problems before they get bad enough to really hurt the company. The earlier he found the problem, the easier to fix. And he thinks  that level of daily management is largely what differentiates good management teams from bad. You want a culture where bad news travels fast and leaders can solve issues quickly.

The National Football League offers a relevant study of cultural impacts on success versus failure. The league is littered with teams that win rarely, make the same mistakes year after year, and are forced to change coaches so often that consistency, process, and artful daily management have little time to take effect, even if they are implemented. You would think poor results would catalyze some serious soul-searching, but that hardly happens. Instead, excuses reign supreme, and coaches and players are increasingly paid on a lower set of goals and standards. It's interesting to note that the bottom half of the NFL teams pay their quarterbacks about the same as the top half. Coaching staffs aren't paid materially differently either. *Losing teams just set lower standards and define their journeys in terms of "progress" as opposed to wins or losses.* They project an image that a system exists and that fans should be more patient, but over time it becomes clear that it's just not true. The virtual equivalent can be seen from factory managers (and their CEOs) in winning versus losing operations. There may in fact be progress, but the pace is too slow to close the gap with winning cultures and teams. Continuous improvement cultures raise an already high benchmark. Winning cultures tend to have amazingly honest conversations about success and how that will be measured, and about humility and how that tends to sustain the already high level of achievement.

The good news is that sports or business death is never all that sudden. The Honeywell case study is a perfect example of a company that got back on track after being on the path to likely failure. And although not illustrated in this book,  Ingersoll-Rand, ITT, and Illinois Tool Works were each successfully managed out of the doldrums. 3M was struggling under a new CEO but became refocused during the pandemic and has risen to the occasion. It is very possible to turn around losing franchises, but it takes a healthy dose of humility and a period of relentless focus.

