# Beyond the Echo - Gabe Czegledy, Software Opportunities in the Resource Sector

**Interviewer :** We are on Collisions Beyond the Echo, welcome to Mr Gabe Czegledy, calling from Toronto. Gabe, you and I met probably a couple of months ago now, we have been working to get this thing going, you are introduced to me as CEO and portfolio manager at Vela Software International, which is an operating group of [[Constellation Software]]. So that's a big mouthful. So maybe I'll turn it over to you and you can maybe fill in the blanks for us a little bit.

**Gabe Czegledy :** OK, good morning. So this is my fourth chapter in my working career. So maybe I'll introduce a little bit of background, how I got here and how we're talking today. What I'd like to do is to tie it to Calgary. So my background is I am an electrical engineer, I started with automation control for a company called Honeywell, always based in Toronto. I did quite well with that business, I was a product manager. What that involved was some global leading-edge projects with the outdoor companies in Alberta. So with St Crud, with S.O Coal Lake, Shell Peas River, those projects. I was a product manager for leading edge, at one point St Crud had the largest automation control in the world, and in office between those customers and the development groups in Phoenix, Arizona, for Honeywell.

And that's how I started my career, I got to know a few people in Calgary, that ties back to where we are today, eventually I ended up in Phoenix, running the international projects group for that company, came back to Canada, in the late nineties to work for a publicly listed company in instrumentation, which was acquired. So I have been involved in being bought by Siemens AG in Germany. And then my reach go back to Calgary. At that point I left that business and joined a service business that was called Colt Engineering which was based in Calgary. 

I have spent quite a long tenure with them, and I knew the CEO of that company quite well from my Honeywell days, we did some ventures together. So that was an interesting use of partnership, with people based in Edmonton, Calgary, at one point we had the most engineers in Alberta, any company in Alberta. That's a very good business, it focuses primarily on oil and gas, in the oil sands it did the front end of the process of frack treatment, and they were big in gas plants and pipelines. 

So I ran the eastern operations for them, which was mostly downstream, refining, engineering. So that business grew substantially and eventually we were gonna do an IPO, and in that process we sold the business to Worley Parsons in Australia, which is a big employer in Calgary. I stayed on, I was one of the associate partners so I was quite involved in their transaction, it was quite interesting and part of what I did was identifying synergies with the transactions, and I led a couple of them from the East, and one of them which is a nuclear business in Ontario.

I started employee number 1 in a new kind of space, and when i left them in 2016 there were 200 people doing work for OBG and Bruce Power. I always had kind of a bend towards entrepreneurial-typed activities, throughout my career, so that was during my chapter at Colt Engineering and Worley Parsons. As part of that I also did M&A work and I bought two service businesses for Worley Parsons, one in Vancouver, one in Fredericktown, and I kind of liked that. This was quite interesting. 

So if you recall back then, this was the last time the price of oil crashed, we all said "Ok, that was interesting, now let's go and do something different." I met [[Mark Leonard]], the founder of [[Constellation Software]], and occasionally he would hire sort of industry-knowledgeable, seasoned individuals that help to deploy capital in new areas that they are not familiar with. And that was kind of the basis for me joining Constellation. My area of expertise is obviously the resource and energy markets, both through mission control and the engineering that we did with Worley Parsons.

So that was how I started and it's been four and a half years, I started with a sheet of blank paper, and in the last four years I have acquired ten companies.

**Interviewer :** So when you came in, Vela Software International, was that already operating or was that the top line of your blank sheet of paper?

**Gabe Czegledy :** So Vela as we say sometimes, Vela is a southern hemisphere Constellation, it has basically four or five portfolios in it, including mine, all in different areas, mine is specific to what is of interest in Calgary, oil and gas and energy. Others do retail, mostly in Australia, there's another one that is more public housing, big business in Croatia, there's another one that does ERP systems for glass manufacturers. 

**Interviewer :** All software-businesses? Is that the consistency?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Pure software businesses, and that's our model. Constellation's model is that we acquire businesses, and we keep them. So that's a little bit unique about our model, it's that we never sell them. And so as I acquire these businesses, they become portfolios that I have to operate as well. So I've gone from scratch to a pretty big business now, 300 people in seven countries. 

**Interviewer :** Across ten specific unique businesses?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes. And so, the area of interest, I kind of applied what I knew from my previous chapters, and so I have businesses that are focused on energy production software, reservoir economics, those kind of tools. Another business runs engineering design in the US. And then a few businesses around product information management. So in Alberta, some of the largest projects in the world were being quite bullish in the last decade. I remember seeing these curves where there were $35 billion worth of capital projects, in Fort McMurray going down. The software did manage product management and documentation, which has always been an interest, because of that, and as this new role I have acquired a couple of businesses in that space. 

**Interviewer :** Out of the ten in your portfolio, how many of them are in Alberta?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Two, right now. Two are headquartered in Calgary. In my portfolio we have four that do business in Alberta. And then Constellation has three others that are headquartered in Calgary. It's an interesting model, it's completely decentralized, as part of the model we don't advocate for the corporate entity, [[Constellation Software]]. We don't advertize, we don't brand it, therefore most people have never heard of it.

**Interviewer :** Which I imagine can be a challenge when you ring them up on the phone and say to a couple of businesses, and they say "Sorry, who are you again?" I can imagine that happens from time to time.

**Gabe Czegledy :** That's right. And often the conversation requires a tutorial on who we are. Having said that, it's probably one of the most successful technology businesses in Canada, one of the most successful in the world. It has a very interesting business model. It seems to work, it is growing quite rapidly.

**Interviewer :** I really appreciate from the M&A perspective the buy and hold. Versus the buy it, build it up, sell it. That's the story you hear more often, probably because it is more transactional, so you do hear about it more often. So I am assuming when you are looking at the criteria of the type of business that you are attracted to, it is probably going to have a different profile. Because this isn't a buy-and-flip, it is a buy-and-hold. So you guys are clearly in it for a much longer horizon. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes, and that kind of ties to the conversation today. What I am hoping to get out of this conversation is that business owners in Calgary, who are looking after what to do with their business, to explain an option that they are maybe not aware of. So from our perspective, we look at software businesses. We do a lot of transactions. So we are quite knowledgeable about the businesses. We focus only on one type of software business, we call it the vertical market software business. And what that means is that it is very much a specific application for a specific market. So a niche software business, another way of saying it. Not a platform business. So I guess the unicorns in technology are the platform businesses.

**Interviewer :** I was going to differentiate it because the platform business is a very different business model. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes you know they go after total available market share, so you know, big markets. Whereas we specialize in those other types of businesses. The common characteristics about those businesses is that they are small. They tend not to be very large. 

**Interviewer :** When you say small, what are we talking about? A top line of 5 million? 10 Million? Just to get a kind of parameter for people to think about. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Typically 5 to 10 million would be the sweet spot. We have done larger, sometimes much larger, but the traditional everyday transactions are in that space. And we also buy smaller than that, we buy quite small. In this case we tend to append them to an existing business, as opposed to making them stand-alone. But there's kind of a threshold around 5 million where the business is big enough. The way I look at it is that a business of that size has a general manager typically, and then three to four leaders. One doing R&D, one doing sales, support, and one services. So the spend and control is of that size and typically maybe ten to twenty employees. They serve a very specific market, everyone knows each other, knows their families, knows their kids probably, and there's a very tight relationship with the customers.

And the customers know them very well. And we find those are very attractive businesses to own, and what we do then is put our best practices. We are a very data-centric business, we track all of our companies globally, and we use that data to come up with best practices. And then we try to disseminate to all businesses, or share with the businesses so that they can improve themselves. That's the model of the business. 

The other model is that we are decentralized, so the control is pushed down to the businesses. So when I acquire these businesses, like the ones in Calgary, there's a  general manager in town, and that person is basically autonomous, and we measure them on their performance, and they benefit from their performance. And it is sort of a closed loop that way, I don't run these businesses, the people that are in them run them. 

**Interviewer :** So you're very much looking for a certain set of parameters in a business, but from what I am hearing loud and clear, the team dynamic and how that leadership structure, that matches up with the 5 to 10 million range, sounds like something critical. It has to be a niche business. Are these businesses typically older, younger? Like if somebody rapidly went to five million over a couple of years, is that more risky, or are you guys looking for something that has a bit more track record, or it all depends?

**Gabe Czegledy :** So in this kind of size range, you got different types of businesses. If you are the owner of one of those companies, you have a few options. Maybe I can just sort of lay them out. So if you are rapidly growing and you aspire to be much larger, typically you are then looking for venture capital or private equity funding to inject capital into your business to grow. And you are willing to sacrifice some share of the ownership in that exchange of capital. Those are rapidly growing businesses. They tend to be businesses that private equity or some other organizations that buy with the idea to buy, let it grow for a certain period of time, and then flipping it. And they tend to leverage the business, they borrow money to do that. They also tend to come in and be pretty specific in how it is managed, because they need to make sure it is growing, etc. So those are typically businesses where our model is not suited for that. 

More traditional for us is a business that's been around for a while, on average ten years, maybe even longer, so the owner could have a need for capital and wants to continue to manage the business. And he wants to do that, but he wants to continue to do it with their framework and their model. That is something that we do occasionally. So they sell the business but they continue to run it under their own umbrella. 


**Interviewer :** It's a great way for them to unlock some of their nest egg, right?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes. And then the other typical case, maybe the majority is when an owner has put his work into a business for many years, looks to de-risk the sweat equity that they put into it, but wants the business to have a good home. So that's another typical model that we do quite well at. And often they either retire or they depart but they have a succession plan in mind. So we have found that we come 75% of the time to take the leadership within the business, our best approach. Occasionally, we will hire people and put them into a business, but generally we let the business succession plan occur, so that's a typical model as well. 

Theses businesses, they can even get larger, they can grow to have two layers of management, and we think about it that way: it is this idea that everyone in the business and the general managers know who the people are. 

And in some of them, there are a few businesses in Calgary that have done quite well, gone public, or in some other examples private equity has come in. Private equity will come in, buy a platform business, do a roll up of several smaller acquisitions, with the idea that it grows double or triple size, and sell it. There's some of that going on in Calgary as well. 

**Interviewer :** In the last five years and this fundamental structural change in the energy sector, from the outside, and that's the value of someone like yourself, who is looking in but also knows this market, is there a lot of opportunities here? When you look at like, present state and maybe the next two to three years, what's your perspective of where we're headed, opportunity-wise?

**Gabe Czegledy :** So I would say that during 2018, 2019, it was quite frothy in the oil and gas sector, there was this unconventional boom going on in the US particularly, and as production ramped up in United States and in Western Canada too, there was quite an interest in this concept of a digital oil field, or digitizing the oil field. And software businesses in Houston, and to some extent now Alberta, there was a lot of money being poured, a lot of mergers and acquisitions activity in 2018 and 2019. It was quite frothy. And then of course 2020 showed up, demand dropped significantly, particularly in the US last year and now it is started here as well. So what's currently happening is a lot of consolidation going on, a lot of companies buying each other, but in terms of projects and capital spending that's been basically stopped completely. In terms of drilling and exploration that's also come to an halt for now. 

Now for software businesses like the ones we are talking about, the ones that I own, it's actually been not too bad a year, and that points to, if you're interested in knowing where Calgary should go, this is a bit of a learning. In my case I have a couple of businesses in Calgary, one does production economics, I purchased it from a private equity firm, and another that is greenhouse gas compliance reporting for the provincial federal government. In both cases they actually grew last year, and in the case of reservoir economics, if you're trying to decide what production you could curtail, or how to optimize it, you need software to make those decisions. On the environmental frame, that's just a new area and that's going to grow rapidly now, this year with the change in the US they will finally start to worry about that as well. So that's kind of a growth area for us. 

We also bought a similar business for that in Norway. Norwegians lead the world in this sort of modern oil and gas reality. That's interesting, I've found an interesting place for those companies, I've bought three companies in Norway. One does fracture production with 30-35 different customers. In Norway they have to do a five year rolling forecast of greenhouse gases. And they also have software for, if you're discharging into the ocean, what chemicals can be legally discharged into the ocean and things like that.

**Interviewer :** So you made a comment earlier about the digitization of the oil field. I had a lot of guests saying that sometimes the energy sector gets a bad rep for not being innovative. But when you work in it, there is a ton of innovation. When you talk about Norway or other parts of the world, are those places where we can look at a roadmap and say "Hey, see what they are doing over there?". I am curious, energy demand is still there even though it's reduced, that need for efficiency as well as the environmental case to be made for just doing that better. Is that a trend that we can still look to see in Alberta compared to other parts of the world in your mind?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes, definitely. I like to talk a little bit about Norway because it is quite a unique, it's a small place, about the size of Alberta actually, and like Alberta it has kind of all the international oil companies playing in the space in some fashion. It's different than Alberta though, in taxes. Cause Norway is so far away. I haven't seen it anywhere else, there is a lot of collaboration between the oil companies to address greenhouse gas. There are several examples where they have come with a depository of data that they share for regulatory data, greenhouse chemicals, and all other kinds of idea. Which, interestingly, hasn't been replicated anywhere else. And then you move to North America. I was once involved in this company, they do game theory and strategy planning, and Deloitte once did around 2014 a game theory analysis at that time. If I recall, there were way more projects than capacity, both in construction and engineering in Alberta to deliver them. And the game theory was to see where it was going. I used the same game theory in the nuclear industry in Ontario to see where it was going. The characteristics of the customers there is that they wanted to participate but they did not want to do it jointly or together in the same room. 

**Interviewer :** Yeah I have heard this story about safety and environment where nobody wants to share the data and where the learning actually happens, cause it is a joint problem.  

**Gabe Czegledy :** I think in Norway you are so close to the North Pole that everybody just bonds together. And certainly in the US I would think it is different as well as they are quite competitive down there. So, can we learn from that? I think we can. Particularly in sharing best practices about global issues like greenhouse gas emissions and methane emissions and those kind of things. The industry needs to start bonding together a little bit. 

**Interviewer :** The consolidation that you were mentioning in Alberta. Are more people talking together than it was before, because they did not have a choice? Because the necessities, sometimes, it is a driver of change?

**Gabe Czegledy :**  I don't know. I really can't comment too much on that. Because it is hard, you know, in a previous world we would come and talk to customers and figure out what's wrong. It's hard to do that in a Zoom call. It is such a shock state  right now, that no, currently people are really talking to each other. 


**Interviewer :**  When you look around the world, cause obviously your opportunities are wherever they might be, how much does the regulatory, government, how much does that play in your decisions about how friendly or not a government is toward a particular industry, whether you choose to participate in this industry, in that market. Again, I know nothing about Norway, using that as a comparison, the role their government plays, and regulations, you know, removing barriers for companies?

**Gabe Czegledy :** Maybe I can bring it back to what we find in the same attractive software company. It is kind of independent of geography. So if you are an owner and you do maybe ultimately wish to sell your business, we often have conversations about what do you need to do to make your business more valuable and more attractive to potential buyers like myself. And one of the points that you bring up is that it's an all-around, having software that is sticky, sticky software. For the customers, it is hard for them to change, one of the thing that we find to be very attractive is to have anything to do with compliance and regulatory reporting. Things were regulations change on a frequent basis and it has actually happened in Canada in the last 18 months, as each government has changed the rules in each jurisdiction...

**Interviewer :**  Yeah, from what I've been told, every month or every quarter there is some parameter that changed, and we have yet to reach a standardized, like this is the official way to report our data. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Yes, so that is usually a good thing. But this also applies to engineering design for instance, where you have code and regulation around design, let's say pressure vessels, or heat exchanges or whatever. And typically those things are set for safety reasons and change sometimes on a pretty frequent basis, a couple of years, therefore you have to renew your software. And that's making it more attractive. 

From our perspective, other things like what percentage of your top line is recurring revenue, that's an important aspect. And then, your market reach. If you look at the businesses in Calgary, obviously the nature of the customers is the same as in Texas in the US, and some companies, not a lot, but there are a few that have actually made that transition and they are getting customers on both side of the board, but that's a big step. There are quite a few businesses in this space in Calgary, we see like 300 actually, but it's relatively small because it's ten times that in Ontario, and ten times that in Texas too. So, for really small companies to go after customers in the U.S., i jokingly refer to it as bringing a hockey stick to a gun fight. It's a very competitive market, big market, with tough competition, pretty intimidating for small companies in Alberta to go down there. But having said that, there are good examples of companies that have done it, and obviously that makes it more valuable to be able to play in both spaces. Of the two businesses I have, one is pure Canadian-based at this point. One way you can make this transition is to pick the right customer that has operations in the U.S and then use that to move into your market. The other business I have is actually very much focused on the U.S and winning and winning customers in competitive situations. How do you do that? If your business is equal, you'll probably lose to the Americans, so ...

**Interviewer :**  I have to ask what kind of value proposition do you have to have, because you start at a disadvantage because you're Canadian with your hockey stick. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Of course, it's true anywhere in the world, really. If you're out of town, you are at a disadvantage. So there has to be some aspect to the software that is superior. Whether it is the technology, or whether it is the support of the technology, or the knowledge of the application, those are the things that persuade the customer. There is this "local is better" concept everywhere in the world. This is one area where our regions have struggled, they did not have a lot of success in moving into other jurisdictions, other geographies. Whereas Canadians have been much better at that just because we are much closer and much better aligned with the Americans particularly. In South America too. 

**Interviewer :** You talk of some of those software companies that have been in Alberta. Was there a much of a drive, years ago, to go outside of market, when there was, quote and quote, so much abundance and companies would say, "you know what, there is just enough business here, we don't have to chase it in other places..." But now we feel that if we want to survive or thrive, we need to go outside of our borders. We don't have a choice now, whereas a few years ago, it did not feel like a make or break. I've certainly had a few guests share that with me. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** Certainly that's true today, there is a driver right now. Cause it is consolidating and shrinking in Alberta. But I think there are lots of examples where even in the heydays, when things were booming, there were enough visions to see that ultimately they would have to go into other places. Lots of the larger software businesses in Calgary have had private equity funding. And in some cases Canadian private equity but in a lot of cases U.S. private equity. And obviously, once that happens, perspectives change quite a lot as well. So they are focused on looking at larger addressable markets so they can grow and then sell. So it's been kind of both, but there's been a class of businesses that have been focusing solely on the local market. Now to move outside of that is a big step. In that situation what I would suggest is you have to take a step and try to move into a different market. Try to move into new initiatives, that's a term that we use, you gotta adapt your technology, americanize it, whatever, to find a new spot in the world and try and go after that. 


**Interviewer :**  And especially when you are talking about regulations and things like that, you obviously gonna have to become an expert at whatever their regulatory environment is, because your customers are looking for you to help guide them, especially in that environment. 

**Gabe Czegledy :**  Certainly that scenario, that's very local, so the regulations are really state specific in the U.S., like California is really the one leading it right now. So you are going to have to adapt, to match your software to local conditions. The other pivot, given the consolidation that's going on, is you need to look at other areas into the future, things like renewables, some of these other areas now. If you're doing production monitoring in the oil and gas industry, there are analogies there that can be used towards renewables, it can be used in other areas. Pick a spot where you can see if you can adapt, pivot your technology and go after that is something that everybody should be thinking about right now. 

**Interviewer :** When you talk about ESG, that's not oil and gas specific. But that's on a tear right now. Companies putting out their first ESG reports. In Calgary I have seen more of that floating around. The acronym was not even popular a couple of months ago. 

**Gabe Czegledy :**  Yeah that has changed quite a bit. But it tends to be focused more on corporate platform level, it's all your offices, real estate and things like that, versus what we're involved in is regulation specifically for calculating if you have to pay a carbon tax, some kind of monetized emission. That's much more specific, and to us that's a much more attractive area. 

**Interviewer :** Yes because I had someone say to me the other day, you startup as a vitamin or a prescription. Cause a vitamin, you might go take it, but a prescription the doctor gives you, you gonna go fill it. So what I am hearing is that you are looking for softwares that are much more prescriptive in that way. It is a nice to have vs have to have. 

So from your perspective, simply on, bullish, bearish, what do you see for Calgary opportunities? You've hinted at it, when you look in the 5 next years and you look at his market do you say "yeah there is definitely some good tech here with some really great people that we can scale", is that something that you always have your eyes on in this market here for the next future, as good as your crystal ball is? 

**Gabe Czegledy :**  With all the different places I have done business in, one thing I have always found about Calgary and Alberta is the culture here is quite advanced in terms of how the businesses are run, and how it serves the people. And I've seen that in the companies that I have, there's this kind of ingredient, some advanced leadership, skill set in this community, it is hard to describe, but it is things like how our leadership teams interact, how do they do strategic planning, how do they do development planning. I saw it also in the customer base, in the gas and chemical companies. They all had this high level skill set around leadership development. It serves businesses well in terms of a DNA of a good company. With that in place, and if you can pivot that expertise you have around energy in some other area, I think there is a future. Some of the drawbacks to me is that the size of Alberta is relatively speaking small in the world in terms of number of people, and when you look at the number of graduates in Vancouver, Toronto and Waterloo, those groups are much larger. So the developers and the technology people are attracted to those places. So it's gonna be a challenge to keep talent in Calgary. You got the rockies for you, you got a lifestyle.

**Interviewer :**  We have it for us, that's sure. Plus the prices, last time I checked you can have a house here for a little bit cheaper than Toronto. I have had a lot of guests on, and the question about how do we attract more talent, and we don't need only to attract them for their first job, but they will look beyond and ask what will I do next? And where can I go? And there are a lot of factors that I know are going to take years for Calgary to move around, and as we've been around this path, we trying to diversify, especially from a technology perspective. 

**Gabe Czegledy :** It's a good place, it's a great city, with a skilled workforce. With those ingredients, it's pretty competitive probably. 

**Interviewer :**  If somebody is listening to this show today, and they are in a position where they would like to either be acquired, or getting involved with you, what's the best way to get in contact with you? 

**Gabe Czegledy :** We're always available for that conversation. Certainly you can ping me, we have a whole team that works on this as well. We're pretty active, we're talking to everyone. 