# Boeing, [[Transdigm]] and a history of aftermarket distribution

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Can you give a short introduction to your background in aerospace?

I began working at a company called Aviall in 1985. There was a change in leadership and the job of director of marketing and supplier services opened up. It was a huge learning curve, but I took over traditional marketing, advertising, and things like that, but also the management of all the product lines that the company represented. As a distributor, we represented 75 or 100, and that fit my persona, so I spent most of my career doing that with manufacturers like 3M, Collins Aerospace, Goodrich at the time, Goodyear, and many others. The third element of my job was to find more of those, to convince more suppliers that we were the right channel to market for them. I did all those things, then had an opportunity to relocate to Seattle. Boeing had bought the company in 2006, so I went up there to represent our subsidiary Aviall inside the Boeing company.

### Can we go back to the early days of Aviall? How did a typical supplier relationship work? How does that work if I'm selling standard, tier 3, or tier 4 components?

The business was very different in the 1980s and 1990s. It was before many of the rollups of brands. You had many more independent companies out there, which gradually started consolidating into these monster companies. Typically, early on, the suppliers had multiple distributors that would sell their products within a region. It might be a territory within the US, it might be all of North America, it might be broader, or it might not have any restrictions. There were a few situations where we were exclusive, we were the sole channel to market for a product line, but that was rare in those days. You would buy from the manufacturer at a discount; they would publish a price list to the market. We got a discount off of that, but the price list was really for the installers, the companies that were doing repairs on airplanes. That was the list price that they could charge. They would buy at a discount from that, but we would make a gross margin on that sale, and the business was really all about availability of product. The FBO (fixed-base operator), or the maintenance shop, don't know what they need until they take something apart. They would say, I need this component part, or I need this series of parts, and they have their preferred supplier/distributor that they go to. You want to be that preferred supplier, and you want to have what they want and need and be able to get it shipped out quickly.

### Aviall had a 20-odd percent gross margin.

Typically, especially in general aviation. It’s a little bit lower in the commercial airline space. The suppliers could, to a degree, price how they like although in many cases, the contracts selling their product into production at a Boeing or a Cessna limited the annual price increase that they could do – not always, but often – so they tended to have relatively small, 3% or 4% price increases. Unless something catastrophic happened with the prices of titanium or something that forced them, it was generally small.

### If I'm a supplier of a connector or valve, for example, and I'm selling on new platforms and aftermarket, Boeing says, okay, you're on the new platform in production. Therefore, this is the price increase you can push for every year in the aftermarket, and that's contractually in the agreement?

Yes. Not in every case, but that was often the case. That sort of limited them. A company like Goodyear, which makes tires for Boeing and every other aircraft manufacturer, might not have those restrictions on every single tire. Still, typically, they would roll that all in and have kind of a peanut-butter-spread price increase, varied by product a little bit, but generally, there was a rough average of 3% or 4%.

### That list price the supplier puts out every year, which the MRO shops use when they charge their airline, they’re saying this is the list price, and it’s just the margin taken out of every point, from the Aviall, from the MRO shop, to the airline?

Right.

### I noticed in Aviall's old filings that they had exclusive contracts with Rolls-Royce and GE for engine parts. How did those relationships work?

Those came about in 1999 when the company went through a lot of chaos. It's a long story, and top leadership changed. The CEO of the company was let go, and another fellow was hired. He recognized that Aviall, like any distributor, was like a pipe that's so big, and we only have this amount of stuff going through it. We can add additional content flowing through that pipe without much in the way of incremental costs. Our net profit is going to grow much more as a result, because we can add.

The most lucrative in terms of product lines out there are turbine engine parts. They’re extremely expensive relative to their size and high technology. We had had history in the turbine engine business in prior years because Aviall's primary business, up until about 1997, was engine overhaul. Aviall was the largest independent engine overhaul company in the market. Then GE, Rolls-Royce, and Pratt & Whitney, those companies began to realize how lucrative that business was, and they were the source of production, so they could really capture that business, and they did. So Aviall sold off those engine businesses and was left with this distribution business. But because having a distributor was sort of symbiotic with those engine shops, so when we had them, a lot of the parts would be bought not only for their overhaul business, but we could sell them over the counter into the market. That became a very important part of our business, and when those engine products were sold, we lost that.

We began to talk to the engine manufacturers about doing this. In 1999, we were able to win the M250, which is a helicopter engine from Rolls-Royce. That led to conversations with Rolls-Royce about the T56 engine, which was the engine on the C-130 airplane, the old one, and the H model. We signed that in 2001; in fact, we were in Indianapolis working on that contract on 9/11. That's a whole story in and of itself, but we were able to win that, in spite of all that catastrophe, and that business almost doubled Aviall within two years.

### How did they go exclusive, GE and Rolls?

GE probably did it for other reasons. In the case of Rolls-Royce, for those two engine programs, Rolls-Royce had attempted to do the distribution themselves. As is the case with many manufacturers, all the metrics that drive manufacturing are not consistent with aftermarket support and spare parts. They don’t like keeping inventory. They don’t do a good job filling orders and projecting. Their whole production line was based on firm orders, so if the aftermarket came in and said, we think we're going to sell 100 of these turbine wheels this year, the production line said whatever, we're not building a thing until you actually have an order placed in the system. Or the production line would say, we don't think you'll sell 100; we think you'll sell 50, so we're going to make 50. There was this huge disconnect. They realized the only way to discipline themselves was to have a third party do this. So Aviall was able to come in, and we bought all their inventory, which included a lot of slow-moving material. A lot of dollars came into them on an old program, and then we gave them long-term order boards and really good forecasts. We increased the service level to the customers and helped them win back the business they had lost to PMA. It was successful with the helicopter engines, so they were very amenable to the T56 also. There are some different dynamics, it’s a military engine, but ultimately, the same issues strobe it.

GE was a little more of a pure financial play, where they had these older engine models and were no longer producing whole engines for airplane production. They wanted to monetize that revenue stream and take that money and dump it into a new program or something else.

### How did you win some business back from the PMAs?

There were several companies, but one was called EXTEX; I think they're still around. PMA companies are sort of opportunistic. They looked at the Rolls-Royce M250 and said, this particular component is failing prematurely, Rolls isn't solving the problem, and the other one is hard to get. They cherry-picked the problem parts and created an equivalent or better version of it and got it approved. Then the customers, not all of them, but many of them, started to adopt those parts and switch over. Aviall was able to come in and eliminate the availability problem. It's available, and you can always get it from us. Secondly, we were able to do package deals where we said, we'll come in and maybe give you a rebate on your total purchases with us of X percent, which was to their advantage. The more high-dollar parts that went there, the more of a rebate they had on their entire purchasing. We were able to leverage our position as a catalog distributor, so that was effective. A lot of it came into communication with the customer, bringing Rolls-Royce in, solving the problems, and elevating these problems that had been sort of invisible to everybody in Rolls. I'm not blaming anybody at Rolls; I'm just saying it's the nature of business. For those companies, the aftermarket is often an afterthought.

### How has engine parts distribution at Rolls been over the last 20 years by new models such as power-by-the-hour, for example?

Power-by-the-hour is definitely out there. Customers really like it, airlines especially because it allows them to pay a flat or a predictable cost for engine overhauls and maintenance. From a distribution standpoint, what GE and Pratt & Whitney, and Rolls were able to realize was that even if we, GE, are doing the overhaul, it’s okay to have a middle third-party managing availability of the product because there was always a disconnect between the company-owned MRO shop and the production line. There were always supply problems, and we were able to facilitate that. We would sell to them at the same price that we would sell to anybody else. Those were usually contractual. The shops may not have liked it initially because they may have gotten a better deal being a sister company or part of the same organization, but in the long run, all their production and availability issues were removed. I don't know if any internal cost-sharing activity was going on within GE or Rolls-Royce. I doubt it.

### So today, they have their own MRO shops and do engine overhauls, but they outsource the parts distribution to Aviall, Satair, for the availability.

Typically, on the older engines, the ones that are out of engine production. Generally, when the engines are still in production, they like to retain control of that. At a certain point, when they start to see the fleet begin the decline, it crests and starts to decline overall, then that's when they are okay with monetizing that demand tail.

### Talking about tier 3 and tier 4 parts, where the components are lower valued, how did you see someone like TransDigm work with Aviall back then, 20 years ago?

We had a pretty good relationship. The interesting thing about TransDigm, especially early on in the 2000s and the early 2010s, was that the individual business units operated somewhat autonomously. There didn’t seem to be an overarching relationship strategy at the corporate level. They allowed each division to do its own thing. Some of the TransDigm businesses had an exclusive distributor, and some of them had multiple. Each one was different, and as an Aviall or a Satair, or somebody else, you had to go in and convince them you were the right distributor for them. In some cases, the companies they had purchased were businesses that Aviall had a longstanding relationship with, so everything just sort of mapped over without much of a change. TransDigm was much less interested in a personal relationship as a company. The individual business issues still had it, but it became much more of a true business-business sort of relationship. They could be relatively impersonal, to the point of being ruthless at times, about take it or leave it; this is the business deal. That got more and more extreme, especially after Boeing bought the company and Boeing and TransDigm started getting in each other’s grills.

In 2012 or 2014, Jim McNerney had gone in a conversation with Wall Street on an earnings call. He said that TransDigm was this horrible company that was jacking up prices and creating chaos in the industry, and that began an ongoing tit-for-tat between the companies. When I moved to Seattle, one thing I would continually remind the procurement people, who would be in these little battles at TransDigm, was when you take a shot at TransDigm, TransDigm’s first shot back is at Aviall. I think at one point, Aviall had over $100 million of revenue tied up in TransDigm product lines. They were some of our largest product lines in the engine business and we said, you are creating havoc. You don't feel it, but Boeing feels it, and you need to dial this back. They're not the enemy. You may think of them that way, but they're our friend. Of course, they ignored that, and eventually, after I was gone or had at least moved to Seattle, Aviall lost several of the bedrock product lines. Champion was one of the core lines that Aviall had since the beginning of time.

### Why was that?

> Because TransDigm was leveraging Boeing by saying hey, you're jerking us around over here, you didn't award us something or you're bad-mouthing us. Whatever you're doing, we're not going to renew the contract with Aviall and take away $50 million worth of revenue just like that. No discussion, no nothing, and Aviall was powerless to do anything about it.

### I guess Boeing does not care about $50 million?

It depends on what level, but I don't think they do. Even now, Boeing doesn't understand the aftermarket. I've made this joke repeatedly. In 2018, Boeing Global Services stood up the aftermarket business and had all these grand plans for a $50 billion enterprise. It also happened to be the 100th year anniversary of Boeing. I said wow, it only took Boeing 100 years to figure out there’s an aftermarket. It was true. Even now, I’m not part of it, but my impression is they really don’t understand it.

### Why doesn't Boeing understand the aftermarket?

Because their core culture is based around building airplanes and selling airplanes, and you've got the old analogy of the razor and the razor blade. Our executives explained multiple times to Boeing leaders that you sell that airplane for $75 million or $200 million, but over the 30-year life of that aircraft, the parts demand is many multiples of that. It's much more profitable, even for a distributor; we make a higher margin than Boeing makes on that airplane sale, but it was so embedded in the way they think that they weren't willing to let go of that and try to look at it holistically as an organization. No one at Boeing ever said this, but what I observed was that Boeing had this basically unspoken attitude that our suppliers are a necessary evil. We have to deal with them but they're always trying to leverage us, so we've got to beat them up. Every time we negotiated contracts, it always had to be a war. There will never be any common ground. We're the OEM, and they're going to get this production business and they should be happy with that; it's an honor to get to do it.

The big companies like Honeywell, Collins, and a few others realized that it’s all hot air. At the end of the day, yes, we would like to have the production business, but the reality is, Boeing doesn't really have any leverage beyond that. We can hold them hostage because it's extremely expensive. If you're already on an airplane, it's very expensive and very time-consuming to pull that battery off the airplane and put this other battery on there. It costs millions of dollars.

### Why is it so expensive?

Ultimately, it’s about engineering. That other battery was engineered from the beginning. So you've got to look at what are the requirements of a different battery, and a lot of times, Boeing changes the specs. The original spec of a 777 back in 1995 or 1990, when the airplane was built, compared to now, it's 2015, and the attitude toward batteries or pumps is different. So they write a new spec and say now it has to meet these hurdles that we would use on a 777X or a 787. It may be a higher bar for the new guy, but often there are no certainties that the new company will get approved. Boeing can abandon those projects and frequently does. Then you've got massive amounts of engineering time that have to be charged somewhere, so you have to have a budget for Boeing to charge it. Then you've got to coordinate with the manufacturer who's engineering their product and getting paid for testing and coordinating all that. We did it on the battery for the 777, and as part of that deal, we got the exclusive distribution of that retrofit battery on that airplane at a very high margin for the life of the 777X. It was very beneficial. Boeing's costs didn't go up.

### Why did they do that for that product?

Because I promoted it. It was my idea.

### You switched out an old battery.

It was a TransDigm battery with a unique technology that customers didn't like. The exclusive distributor of that battery was Satair, so Airbus. I went to the Boeing people and said, everything about this is wrong. It’s bad for Boeing. Let’s partner with Saft, who’s on every other Boeing airplane, and get a new battery. It will be cheaper, it will have double the life, and the customers will love it. In the two or three years since I left and it was approved – one of my last acts was getting that across the line – I think every major 777 operator has converted their fleet, and now all production aircraft come off the line with the Saft system.

I had 75 more projects like that lined up, and I couldn't keep my budget. For every manufacturer I talked to, it was almost like they reached into their wallet and pulled out a list of things they had always wanted to do. I had one company say to me, you're the guy we've been looking for at Boeing for seven years. I said, I’m not even a Boeing guy, I’m an Aviall guy. This seems so obvious to me, there ought to be a whole team at Boeing doing this day in and day out, but they fought it every single step. It was almost a daily occurrence where what they call the Boeing antibodies sort of swam in there and just threw this thing completely off the rails. And you're like, what are you doing? It happened daily, it was unbelievable.

### But it worked. You actually switched out a TransDigm battery. How long did it take? What was the cost?

It took over five years, it should have taken three, but because of all those issues I talked about, it took five, five and a half. It cost Boeing, with them charging their high engineering rates, somewhere between $3 million and $5 million. I don't know what Saft spent. They spent quite a bit engineering their battery solution and the charger, but that program will generate between $15 million and $30 million a year for the next 30 years or more. It's unbelievable.

### Planes with that battery already out there in flight, when they go into a shop, will they change it?

Working with Saft, the sales team went out to the target customers, the 777 operators, starting with the big ones and making a case for doing a fleet conversion. It was a really easy decision for the customer because there are two batteries on the 777. You could swap out one at a time and have a mixed airplane if needed for a period. It took five hours to do the install, which is short. You could do it as an overnight if you had to. They could make these switches, and the retrofit kit cost was less than that of a replacement battery from TransDigm. It was just a slam dunk sale.

### What could TransDigm do?

In theory, they could lower their prices, but that's not their model. In the end, they just held or even raised prices and said, we'll milk this as long as possible. Of course, I haven't had any conversation with them about that, and I don't think they fully realize I was the guy that led that project.

### How many of these projects were there in your time at Aviall that you saw?

I had three or four or five more that we had working. Then I had a budget of $5 million or $6 million allocated to me to have engineers build their time to for these projects. In this, I won't use a bad word, but this guy was put in charge of a separate program. Our program is called Supplier Alliances. Some executive said, we'll roll Supplier Alliances in there, and the guy said oh, okay, now I'll just take your $5 million and dump it in this other rack over here. He just took it away. I said you can't do that, and he said watch me. I said, you better leave the money for the battery thing because there is no battery on the 777X except this one, so it has to get done. That was a bit of a rebuke to him. He got moved on, but the damage was done, and at that point, I knew it wasn't worth fighting it anymore, and that's when I bailed on Boeing.

### Is there only a $5 million budget for doing this, trying to replace these types of products at the scale of Boeing?

If I'd had a $20 million budget, more manpower, and more cooperation, we could have done 20 projects. Many of these weren't super expensive and weren't super hard. It was just working through the Boeing system. In Boeing, there are 1,000 silos. Everybody is in that silo, and their only concern is what they are measured on and the other departments with whom they directly interact. Beyond that, they don't consider what's good for the company. They don't think of doing anything outside the box because that's risky.

Why take a risk when I could keep doing the same thing over and over again and get paid? Well, because it makes the company a bunch of money. It doesn't make me money, and it doesn't make my department successful, so why would I care? To give an example, right after Aviall was purchased in 2006, we had been in the process of buying a little brake shop up in Chicago, a small MRO business. The fellow selling it was in his 70s and ready to walk away from it, so he said, I'll sell it to you for $2 million, to sell the assets, and the people will come over. You walk in and take over. You don't have to buy the company; you buy the business and run it. Boeing said, this is great; you're going to do an acquisition. We love acquisitions. We'll run it through our process. The guy at Aviall leading this project said he was on a phone call with 45 different departments at Boeing, on one call.

### For $2 million?

For a $2 million asset buy. The owner bailed out twice. He was so angry with people coming in wanting to talk about hazmat issues, and OSHA this, and this legal thing, and regulations here, every single thing you could think of and a hundred other things you couldn't think of. They managed to talk him off the ledge, bring it back, and get the deal done. After the deal was done, Boeing had spent $2.5 million on internal cost in addition to the $2 million we paid the seller. If they hadn't gotten involved, we could have paid him $4 million and saved money. It's just endless. I could go on for days about all the craziness that it creates.

### What you're saying is interesting because you replaced this TransDigm battery. It worked; you said you had 20 other projects, and if you had a bigger budget, you could keep doing more. That's a narrative violation because people think these TransDigm products are very sticky; you can't rip them out. But you're suggesting you can rip them out.

> Yes, that was part of this initial conversation. Where the idea came from of this specific battery was Boeing had said we need to take TransDigm out of the picture. So, being an engineering company, their idea was let's reverse engineer TransDigm parts. They had this project called Insourcing, which came to be named something else later. Let's identify these egregiously priced TransDigm parts, and we will make a Boeing version that we can offer the customer at a lower price.

### So they were going against them.

They were going to do it. If you step back and think about it, based on what I've already told you, this is like an elephant saying, I want to do this microscopic surgery myself. And you say, you are not equipped to do that. This is so outside your capability. That's where I raised my hand and said great idea, but why don't we go to a supplier that's not TransDigm, whom we have a favorable impression of, and let them do the heavy lifting on the product? They already know how to make a battery, switch, pitot probe, whatever it is you're concerned about. Let's go to somebody that does that and cooperate with them. They'll pay all their engineering costs. All we have to do is provide engineering support and pay for testing and qualification. It will be a synergistic relationship, and every manufacturer out there wants to do this, all of them.

### Why didn't Boeing do this at scale?

Because they're engineers and wanted to engineer it. They spent one year, and that program had a $60 million budget to reverse engineer. Like many things, it ceased being about targeting TransDigm parts, and it ceased being about coming up with a list of all kinds of things we can do. They had the battery on the 777 on the list. I said we're already solving that problem. There's no need. Boeing will never in a million years be able to make a nickel-cadmium battery. They'll never be able to reverse engineer a battery, don't even bother; it's impossible. People already do this. It's old technology. Let's work with somebody. They kept it on the list for a long time, but I finally got someone to take it off.

They were going after one of this, one of that, one of these, and it was a hodge-podge.

### This was the Insourcing program?

Yes, and it wasn't just TransDigm; it was all kinds of stuff.

### Was anything successful?

I don't know. There were probably a few parts. Later they honed back in on the original strategy of focusing on two or three TransDigm businesses that we think are the worst offenders. Let's try to address that comprehensively. It was still badly executed, but at least it was focused, and you had a chance of success.

### But they were engineering internally?

They bought one or several of the components. They sent them to India and Russia, where they had them doing the reverse engineering and design work and then sending them back over here. Again, because of Boeing's convoluted way of doing things, they would bring that drawing back from somebody who knew absolutely nothing about a latch or whatever part it was. Those people had reverse-engineered, but they didn't know the metallurgy, the tension, or the other lessons learned that a company that makes latches would know, and they designed something. Boeing would take that and send it out to machine shops and other companies that could manufacture it as a build-to-print part. It's a Boeing part, and you're just going to make it for a price and say request for information. How manufacturable is this? What would you change to make it better? And these companies are going, why would I give you that intellectual property when I don't even know if I'm going to get the business?

So they got some feedback from some companies. They ended up going with the lowest bidder, and they would do them in small tranches. You've got one company making four latches and another one making five latches. It's totally out of touch with reality. They could have said, if we're going to do this reverse engineering in-house, let's partner with a company that is our go-to on latches. We'll send them the stuff, and they'll tweak it and make it perfect, then we'll mutually go out and take the market. We'll convert customers and leverage the power of Boeing to get people to use this Boeing latch. That's not how they did it. They probably came up with a marketing plan at some point, but it was all just a bunch of engineers in a room, very naively going about this. It was unbelievable. I remember thinking I cannot believe this.

### If you were at Boeing today and had an unlimited budget and full ownership, how would you take TransDigm out of the game?

I don't know if I would necessarily do that, but let's say that's the goal.

### Why would you not do it?

I would want to step back from it and go, what is our ultimate goal here? Is it to abuse this supplier that jacks up prices and makes people angry? Is that the most beneficial thing to Boeing, or is it something else? Because they're not the only supplier that leverages the heck out of Boeing and makes customers unhappy.

Let's say we've agreed that's the right thing to do. I would go through the various products and look at the customer complaints, what they call squawks, that had come into Boeing and say where are the customers unhappy?

### Are there many of them?

There's all kinds of stuff. It's the nature of components in the system. Some things don't last as long as they're supposed to, and some have other problems, like performance issues, price, or other things. I would then come up with some way of force ranking those opportunities and say, let's look at them in terms of revenue, impact on the customer, customer receptivity to converting to that from the OEM part. Even though it's TransDigm, it's still the OEM; it was on the drawing. Which ones are customers most likely to accept that we could offer? Put all that together to come up with the, call it, low-hanging fruit. What is the best strategy?

I had known about the battery going back to the inception of the 777 because I ran the battery program for Aviall, so I was very aware of it. Even though it was 20 years later, I was still aware that it was a big problem.

### Why was it a problem exactly?

The battery had a much shorter life than a typical nickel-cadmium battery. It lasted about five years. It required very expensive specialized equipment, and you couldn't use standard nickel-cadmium battery maintenance equipment. You had to use this special equipment that only they sold. You had to buy this $100,000 piece of equipment, and if you had a battery problem at another site, you had to have that equipment, or you couldn't do anything to it. The battery was not maintainable like a Saft battery or a typical NiCad. It was a sealed device or a sealed part. If you wanted something done internally, you had to ship this 110-pound battery back to the factory to have them work their magic on it for some price, then get it back, and again, it's going to last five years instead of 10 years like a typical NiCad would. Then TransDigm took the price up to about 3X what a typical NiCad would cost, so you've got half the life, triple the cost, and special equipment and other processes. It was one of those things where it seemed like a new technology would be great, but it ended up being a dead end and not the solution that they thought it was.

### Briefly on the pricing, what's your view on TransDigm's approach to pricing relative to other suppliers? Broadly, how egregious is it?

In some cases, they take the price up 10X. If they've got more or less a monopoly, if they're more or less the sole source to the market, in many cases, they'll say the price is no longer $1, it's now $10. And you can cry all you want, but it's $10, and if you cry too much, it will be $11 or whatever. They kind of approach it like a banker would, not like a traditional aerospace company that maybe would have more of a sense of ownership and commitment to the industry. I don't necessarily blame them. It's a brilliant strategy financially. It's been very successful, and other companies have adopted it.

### Who's adopted it?

Honeywell has done it in some cases, not as consistently, but they have done that in some instances. I'm not sure about all the Collins companies, but I suspect some. I remember a brake manufacturer saying that on some of their older brakes, they would harvest the tail of that market by taking prices up and knowing they would continue to get the business until that last brake was shut down.

### So you go through the companies, see the most egregious ones, and see where the customers are most receptive. Then what would you do inside Boeing if you were running the aftermarket?

I would identify a potential partner company, the engineering resources we need internally, and the hurdles. You've got to look at the fleet, too. Is it on a 707? No matter what it is, it's probably not worth it; there are only a handful operating, and they're not your primary customers. You would want to look at that, too, but say, what do we have to do internally to get this across the line? Is the airplane still in production? Then we can get it into the drawing as a production-approved part. It can still be on the drawing as an alternative, even if it's not the primary production item. If it's out of production, the 737 NG is no longer being built, we would have to do a supplemental type certificate. We can do that; Boeing is capable of doing that. It's a separate drawing. It's not the primary drawing for the airplane production, so it's slightly different, but not all that different. We looked at a couple of things like that, but I don't remember the ultimate approval. For the manufacturer of the part, if it's a production part, Boeing can give what they call PMA assist to that manufacturer. Now they can say, it's on our type certificate drawing, so we're now delegating authority for you to go to the FAA and get approval to sell it in the aftermarket. If it's out of production, it's a different process, and I honestly don't remember what that looks like. It's not as clean, but ultimately it's approved. It's just different.

### How difficult is it in the out-of-production, which I guess is most of TransDigm's products?

> In some ways, it's easier because you're not dealing with the production organization, and they're worried about getting airplanes out the door, so this is not a priority to them. Again, I could tell you specific stories of where we ran into roadblocks due to that exact thing, but ultimately, it just takes a bit longer because there are more voices to deal with and more silos. But it can be done.

### You could set up a separate aftermarket organization and partner with other suppliers, give them as you've done with the battery, and roll it out for 50 product lines, then 100, and slowly take back ownership of the aftermarket.

I would be much more targeted; that’s how I think. I would say, what are the specific applications? We were looking at working with a filter manufacturer to develop a filter with a carbon element that was beyond HEPA. It took out germs, viruses, and odors in the air; it was the ultimate filter. We were going to work with them to develop that as an upgrade to the standard filter. That was a bit of a different thing. You may be displacing another supplier, or you may be displacing a supplier that you're working with. The point there was offering a product with enhanced capabilities. That was very targeted, that specific airplane application. You would have to look at each airplane and see if the opportunity was there and if there would be customer interest because these will be more expensive and probably have a shorter life.

### How likely, in your opinion, do you think it is that Boeing would ever roll out a strategy like this and target certain suppliers at scale?

I'd say extremely small. We did it for five or six years, and when they took the budget away, I tried to appeal to leadership and say look, we just did this project. It's worth $500 million. One battery program, this single thing, and I've got more. I couldn't get anybody to pay attention to it. I couldn't even get a minute with them to talk about it. They don't think that way, even the people in the aftermarket business. One of the things I always said about Boeing was, at Boeing, if your conversation is not about something that has a B after it, in billions, if it's not a billion-dollar idea, nobody cares. Because they're used to thinking in terms of getting an order from American Airlines of $10 billion for 100 airplanes or something. But that's not how the aftermarket works.

We gave an example. We said, Boeing, you get an order from American Airlines for $5 billion that will be spread out over seven years of deliveries of 737 MAX airplanes, that's great. I said at Aviall, we get 7,000 orders a day that we ship the same day out of stock, and we do that 250 days a year or more, and it's $5 billion. So we come at our $5 billion in hundreds of thousands of transactions instead of one mega-contract. It's a completely different business model, but it's a good balance because we're supporting those aircraft when they're in service; you're getting the airplanes into service. You're selling them into services. These are very synergistic things, but they don't think that way. They think like an OEM who says well, it's our airplanes, so they have to buy the parts from us. Except they don't have to buy them from you; the only thing they have to buy from you are the proprietary parts, which are a tiny fraction of the parts sold for the airplane.