# Brand Portfolio Companies
While some large companies reap the bulk of revenue from a single brand - Hermes, [[Nike]], Tiffany and Co - many boast diverse portfolios of [[Brands]].  Two of the best known examples of this are Procter and Gamble and [[Unilever]]. Distinguishing which among hundreds of brands are formidable as opposed to vulnerable is challenging. The challenge can be minimized by assessing product categories and seeking companies boasting branded products in more durable and economically attractive franchises. **While not an ironclad rule, we believe that a portfolio of personal care products or luxury brands is generally superior to a portfolio of food brands. **

A diversified brand portfolio offers several advantages. For one, when some products struggle, others absorb the loss and buy time to enable needed corrections. Additionally, brand diversity can contribute scale that pays off in more effective advertising and promotion. The combination of scale and brand diversity can also lead to attractive acquisition opportunities, especially to enable larger companies to buy smaller upstarts. The payoff is twofold, adding growth and combating competitors, which can be especially valuable in product lines where novelty matters to customers or where brand performance is volatile. The returns generated from acquiring promising, cutting-edge brands can also be enhanced by leveraging existing research, innovation, and distribution capabilities.

On the downside, managing a portfolio of brands requires a wider skill set than handling one or a few brands.  Juggling many brands, especially in multiple segments, risks obscuring corporate focus and stretching management too thin. Resource stewardship must be ramped up to assure their most effective deployment across various lines.
