# Breakfast Meeting of the Philanthropy Roundtable
### November 10, 2000

I am here today to talk about so-called "wealth effects" from rising prices for U.S. common stocks.

I should concede, at the outset, that "wealth effects" are part of the academic discipline of economics and that I have never taken a single course in economics, nor tried to make a single dollar, ever, from foreseeing macroeconomic changes.

Nonetheless, I have concluded that most PhD economists underappraise the power of the common-stock-based "wealth effect", under current extreme conditions.

Everyone now agrees on two things. First, spending proclivity is influenced in an upward direction when stock prices go up and in a downward direction when stock prices go down. And, second, the proclivity to spend is terribly important in macroeconomics. However, the professionals disagree about size and timing of "wealth effects" and how they interact with other effects, including the obvious complication that increased spending tends to drive up stock prices while stock prices are concurrently driving up spending. Also, of course, rising stock prices increase corporate earnings even when spending is static, for instance, by reducing pension cost accruals after which stock prices tend to rise more. Thus, "wealth effects" involve mathematical puzzles that are not nearly so well worked out as physics theories and never can be.

The wealth effect from rising U.S. stock prices is particularly interesting right now for two reasons. First, there has never been an advance so extreme in the price of widespread stock holdings and, with stock prices going up so much faster than GNP, the related wealth effect must now be bigger than was common before. and second, what has happened in Japan over roughly the last ten years has shaken up academic economics, as it obviously should, creating strong worries about recession from "wealth effects" in reverse.

In Japan, with much financial corruption, there was an extreme rise in stock and real-estate prices for a very long time, accompanied by extreme real economic growth, compared to the United States. Then, asset values crashed, and the Japanese economy stalled out at a very suboptimal level. After this, Japan, a modern economy that had learned all the would-be-corrective Keynesian and monetary tricks, pushed these tricks hard and long. Japan, for many years, not only ran an immense government deficit but also reduced interest rates to a place withing hailing distance of zero and kept them there. Nonetheless, the Japanese economy, year after year, stays stalled, as Japanese proclivity to spend stubbornly resists all the tricks of the economists. And Japanese stocks prices stay down. This Japanese experience is a disturbing example for everyone and, if something like it happened here, would leave shrunken charitable foundations feeling clobbered by fate. Let us hope, as is probably the case, that the sad situation in Japan is caused in some large part by social psychological effects and corruption peculiar to Japan. In such case, our country may be at least half as safe as is widely assumed.

Well, grant that spending proclivity, as influenced by stock prices, is now an important subject and that the long Japanese recession is disturbing. How big are the economic influences of U.S. stock prices? A median conclusion of the economics professionals, based mostly on data collected by the Federal Reserve System, would probably be that the wealth effect on spending from stock prices is not all that big. After all, even now, real household net worth, excluding pensions, is probably up by less than one hundred percent over the last ten years and remains a pretty modest figure per household, while market value of common stock is probably not yet one-third of aggregate household net worth, excluding pensions. Moreover, such household wealth in common stocks is almost incredibly concentrated, and the super-rich don't consume in proportion to their wealth. Leaving out pensions, the top one percent of households probably hold about fifty percent of common stock value, and the bottom eighty percent probably hold about four percent.

Based on such data plus unexciting past correlation between stock prices and spending, it is easy for a professional economist to conclude, say, that even if the average household spends incrementally at a rate of three percent of asset values in stock, consumer spending would have risen less than one-half percent per year over the last ten years as a consequence of the huge, unprecedented, long-lasting, consistent boom in stock prices.

I believe that such economic thinking widely misses underlying reality right now. To me, such thinking looks at the wrong numbers and asks the wrong questions. Let me, the ultimate amateur, boldly try to do a little better, or at least a little differently.

For one thing, I have been told, probably, that Federal Reserve data collection, due to practical obstacles, doesn't properly take into account pension effects, including effects from 401(k) and similar plans. Assume some sixty-three-year old dentist has $1 million in GE stock in a private pension plan. The stock goes up in value to $2 million, and the dentist, feeling flush, trades in his very old Chevrolet and leases a new Cadillac at the giveaway rate now common. To me, this is an obvious large wealth effect in the dentist's spending. To many economists, using Federal Reserve data, I suspect the occasion looks like profligate dis-saving by the dentist. To me, the dentist, and many others like him, seems to be spending a lot more because of a very strong pension-related wealth effect. Accordingly, I believe that present-day wealth effect from pension plans is far from trivial and much larger than it was in the past.

For another thing, the traditional thinking of economists often does not take into account implications from the idea of "bezzle". Let me repeat: "bezzle", "B-E-Z-Z-L-E".

The world bezzle is a contraction of embezzle, and it was coined by Harvard Economics Professor John Kenneth Galbraith to stand for the increase in any period of undisclosed embezzlement. Galbraith coined the bezzle word  because he saw that undisclosed embezzlement, per dollar, has a very powerful stimulating effect on spending. After all, the embezzler spends more because he has more income, and his employer spends as before because he doesn't know any of his assets are gone.

But Galbraith did not push his insight on.  He was content to stop with being a stimulating gadfly. So, I will now try to push Galbraith "bezzle" concept on to the next logical level. As Keynes showed, in a native economy relying on earned income, when the seamstress sells a coat to the shoemaker for twenty dollars, the shoemaker has twenty dollar less to spend, and the seamstress has twenty dollar more to spend. There is no lollapalooza effect on aggregate spending. But when the government prints another twenty-dollar bill and uses it to buy a pair of shoes, the shoemaker has another twenty dollars, and no one feels poorer. And when the shoemaker next buys a coat, the process goes on and on, not to an infinite increase, but with what is now called the Keynesian multiplier effect, a sort of lollapalooza on spending. Similarly, an undisclosed embezzlement has stronger stimulative effects per dollar on spending than a same-sized honest exchange of goods. Galbraith, being Scottish, liked the bleakness of life demonstrated by his insight. After all, the Scottish enthusiastically  accepted the idea of pre-ordained, unfixable infant damnation. But the rest of us don't like Galbraith's insight. Nevertheless, we have to recognize that Galbraith was roughly right.

No doubt Galbraith saw the Keynesian-multiplier-type economic effects promised by increases in bezzle. But he stopped there. After all, bezzle could not grow very big because discovery of massive theft  was nearly inevitable and sure to have reverse effects in due course. Thus, increase in private bezzle could not drive economies up and up, and on and on, at least for a considerable time, like government spending. 

Deterred by the apparent smallness of economic effects from his insight, Galbraith did not ask  the next logical question: Are there important functional equivalents of bezzle that are large and not promptly self-destructive?

My answer to this question is yes. I will next describe only one. I will join Galbraith in coining new words: first, "febezzle", to stand for the functional equivalent of bezzle; second, "febezzlement, " to describe the process of creating febezzle; and third, "febezzlers," to describe persons engaged in febezzlement. Then, I will identify an important source of febezzlement right in this room.You people, I think, have created a lot of febezzle through your foolish investment management practices dealing with your large holdings of common stock.

If a foundation, or other investor, wastes three percent of assets per year in unnecessary, nonproductive investment costs in managing a strongly rising stock portfolio, it still feels richer, despite the waste, while the people getting the wasted three percent, febezzlers though they are, think they are virtuously earning income.

The situation is functioning like undisclosed embezzlement without being self-limited. Indeed, the process can expand for a long while by feeding on itself. And, all the while, what looks like spending from earned income of the receivers of the wasted three percent is, in substance, spending from a disguised wealth effect from rising stock prices.

This room contains many people pretty well stricken by expired years - in my generation or the one following. We tend to believe in thrift and avoiding waste as good things, a process that has worked well for us. It is paradoxical and disturbing to us that economists have long praised foolish spending as a necessary ingredient of a successful economy.