# Choosing Important Problems

Choosing Important Problems is like [[leverage]].

We can try our hardest, but if we don’t know what the important problems are, aren’t focused on them, and don’t know where to place our effort, we ultimately aren't as effective as we could be.

Where you place your effort is crucial. If your effort is misplaced, you can work 24/7, giving everything you have, losing all semblance of balance in your life, and still not gain the results you’re seeking. Search for the leverage points, the areas which will have a disproportionate effect if solved and focus on fixing those first. Always seek to be working smarter, not harder (Effectiveness > Efficiency).

### Example

Richard Hamming, a famous mathematician, highlighted the importance of this idea for me in his beautiful talk *You and Your Research*: 

> “Having disposed of the psychological objections of luck and the lack of high IQ type brains, let us go on to how to do great things. Among the important properties to have is the belief you can do important things. If you do not work on important problems, how can you expect to do important work? Yet, direct observation, and direct questioning of people, shows most scientists spend most of their time working on things they believe are not important nor are they likely to lead to important things. As an example, after I had been eating for some years with the Physics table at the Bell Telephone Laboratories restaurant, fame, promotion, and hiring by other companies ruined the average quality of the people so I shifted to the Chemistry table in another corner of the restaurant. I began by asking what the important problems were in chemistry, then later what important problems they were working on, and finally one day said, “If what you are working on is not important and not likely to lead to important things, then why are you working on it?” After that I was not welcome and had to shift to eating with the Engineers! That was in the spring, and in the fall one of the chemists stopped me in the hall and said, “What you said caused me to think for the whole summer about what the important problems are in my field, and while I have not changed my research it was well worth the effort.” I thanked him and went on – and noticed in a few months he was made head of the group. About ten years ago I saw he became a member of the National Academy of Engineering. No other person at the table did I ever hear of, and no other person was capable of responding to the question I had asked, “Why are you not working on and thinking about the important problems in your area?” If you do not work on important problems, then it is obvious you have little chance of doing important things.”


### Plain English

All decisions must be made taking opportunity costs into account because we only have one life, and we naturally want to make the most of it (Costs). If we aren’t working on the most important problems in our field, that can make a significant difference in people’s lives, that we are jumping out of bed in the morning to work on, we are disrespecting [[Opportunity costs]].

Not only is there the beneficial first-order effects of working on and trying to solve hard problems, but the second-order effects are noteworthy as well – it drastically influences how and what you think about. By focusing on hard problems, you narrow your subconscious to focus only on what truly matters. However, insidiously, the opposite holds true as well. If you constantly think about ephemeral things of little consequence, don’t be surprised that these thoughts manifest in how you talk, think, and act. Be mindful of what is top of mind.

> While I think most readers will agree with the above, the hard part often lies in knowing what the important problems (and questions) are. We can squander our time by pursuing the wrong ideas, and even the smartest people in the world can fall into this trap. Newton spent a large portion of his life studying alchemy, and Einstein devoted over 30 years pursuing a Unified Field Theory. With the benefit of hindsight, we can say these pursuits were a waste of time, but it is difficult to know in the moment when to be stubborn and double down and when to move on. This idea is simple but not easy.
I realized recently that what one thinks about in the shower is more important than I’d thought. I knew it was a good time to have ideas. Now I’d go further: now I’d say it’s hard to do a really good job on anything you don’t think about in the shower. There’s a kind of thinking you do without thinking that is very powerful. This type of “ambient thought” is necessary for solving hard problems but the tricky part is you can’t control it…When most people’s minds drift it goes towards their top problem in their mind. So, it’s a disaster to let the wrong idea become the top one…Thus has been the lesson to me: be careful what you let become critical to you. Try to get yourself into situations where the most urgent problems are ones you want to think about.
– Paul Graham, The Top Idea in Your Mind  

### Technical Description

Choosing important problems and asking important questions requires that you not only know what those things are, which is step one, but also that you have the courage and clarity of vision to pursue them. It is easy to get lost in the moment, to get distracted, and lose sight of your ultimate vision. Having your field’s most important problems and questions as your north star will help you stay on track, increasing the odds that you do important work, adding value, and making a positive impact on those you seek to serve.

### Quotes

> Most great people also have 10 to 20 problems they regard as basic and of great importance, and which they currently do not know how to solve. They keep them in their mind, hoping to get a clue as to how to solve them. When a clue does appear, they generally drop other things and get to work immediately on the important problem. Therefore, they tend to come in first, and the others who come in later are soon forgotten. I must warn you however, the importance of the result is not the measure of the importance of the problem. The three problems in Physics, anti-gravity, teleportation, and time travel are seldom worked on because we have so few clues as to how to start – a problem is important partly because there is a possible attack on it, and not because of its inherent importance. – Richard Hamming, Creativity

> One reason for this is fame in Science is a curse to quality productivity, though it tends to supply all the tools and freedom you want to do great things. Another reason is most famous people, sooner or later, tend to think they can only work on important problems – hence they fail to plant the little acorns which grow into the mighty oak trees. I have seen it many times, from Brattain of transistor fame and a Nobel Prize to Shannon and his Information Theory. Not that you should merely work on random things – but on small things which seem to you to have the possibility of future growth. In my opinion the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, N.J has ruined more great scientists than any other place has created – considering what they did before and what they did after going there. A few, like von Neumann, escaped the closed atmosphere of the place with all its physical comforts and prestige, and continued to contribute to the advancement of Science, but most remained there and continued to work on the same problems which got them there, but which were generally no longer of great importance to society. Thus, what you consider to be good working conditions may not be good for you! There are many illustrations of this point. For example, working with one’s door closed lets you get more work done per year than if you had an open door, but I have observed repeatedly later those with the closed doors, while working just as hard as others, seem to work on slightly the wrong problems, while those who have let their door stay open get less work done but tend to work on the right problems! I cannot prove the cause and effect relationship, I only observed the correlation. I suspect the open mind leads to the open door, and the open door tends to lead to the open mind; they reinforce each other. – Richard Hamming, You and Your Research


> Great work tends to grow out of ideas that others have overlooked, and no idea is so overlooked as one that’s unthinkable. Training yourself to think unthinkable thoughts has advantages beyond the thoughts themselves. It’s like stretching. When you stretch before running, you put your body into positions much more extreme than any it will assume during the run. If you think things so outside the box that they’d make people’s hair stand on end, you’ll have no trouble with the small trips outside the box that people call innovative. – Paul Graham, What You Can’t Say


> In many fields, the hard problem is not solving problems, but deciding what problems to solve. – Paul Graham, Great Hackers


> Interesting projects have a few big, clear problems rather than a lot of little nasty ones. Working on nasty little problems makes you stupid and great hackers avoid them at all costs. – Paul Graham, Great Hackers


> Instead of working back from a goal, work forward from promising situations. That is what most successful people actually do anyway. Don’t commit to anything in the future, but just look at the options available now, and choose those that will give you the most promising range of options afterward. It’s not so important what you work on, so long as you’re not wasting your time. Work on things that interest you and increase your options and worry later about which you’ll take. So, I propose that as a replacement for “don’t give up on your dreams,” aim to stay “upwind.” Look for smart people and hard problems. Smart people tend to clump together and if you can find such a clump, it’s probably worthwhile to join it. This can be tricky as there is a lot of noise and fakery going on, but the best protection is always to be working on hard problems. Hard means worry: if you’re not worrying that something you’re making will come out badly, or that you won’t be able to understand something you’re studying, then it isn’t hard enough. There has to be suspense. In practice, “stay upwind” reduces to “work on hard problems.” – Paul Graham, What You’ll Wish You’d Known


> If it takes years to articulate great questions, what do you do now, at sixteen? Work toward finding one. Great questions don’t suddenly appear. They gradually congeal in your head. And what makes them congeal is experience. So, the way to find great questions is not to search for them – not to wander about thinking, what great discovery shall I make? You can’t answer that; if you could you’d have made it. The way to get a big idea to appear in your head is not to hunt for big ideas, but to put in a lot of time on work that interests you, and in the process keep your mind open enough that a big idea can take root. Einstein, Ford, Beckenbauer all used this recipe. They all knew their work like a piano player knows the keys. So, when something seemed amiss to them, they had the confidence to notice it. Put in time how and on what? Just pick a project that seems interesting: to master some chunk of material, or to make something, or to answer some question. Choose a project that will take less than a month and make it something you have the means to finish. Do something hard enough to stretch you, but only just, especially at first. If you’re deciding between two projects, choose whichever seems most fun. If one blows up in your face, start another. Repeat till, like an internal combustion engine, the process becomes self-sustaining and each project generates the next one. (This could take years). – Paul Graham, What You’ll Wish You’d Known


> There are two main things you can do to become a good hacker: become very good at programming and learn a lot about specific, cool problems. These turn out to be equivalent, because each drives you to do the other. The way to be good at programming is to work a) a lot and b) on hard problems. And the way to make yourself work on hard problems is to work on some very engaging project. Odds are it won’t be a class assignment…Look around you and see what the smart people seem to be working on; there’s usually a reason. – Paul Graham, Undergraduation


> The bigger the problem, the harder it is to get yourself to work on it. Why is it so hard to work on big problems? One reason is that you may not get any reward in the foreseeable future. If you work on something you can finish in a day or two, you can expect to have a nice feeling of accomplishment fairly soon. If the reward is indefinitely far in the future, it seems less real. Another reason people don’t work on big projects is, ironically, fear of wasting time. What if they fail? Then all the time they spent on it will be wasted. (In fact, it probably won’t be, because work on hard projects almost always leads somewhere.) In addition, big problems are terrifying. There’s an almost physical pain in facing them. It’s like having a vacuum cleaner hooked up to your imagination. All your initial ideas get sucked out immediately, and you don’t have any more, and yet the vacuum cleaner is still sucking. You can’t look at a big problem too directly in the eye. You have to approach it somewhat obliquely. But you have to adjust the angle just right: you have to be facing the big problem directly enough that you catch some of the excitement radiating from it, but not so much that it paralyzes you. You can tighten the angle once you get going, just as a sailboat can sail closer to the wind once it gets underway. If you want to work on big things, you seem to have to trick yourself into doing it. You have to work on small things that could grow into big things, or work on successively larger things, or split the moral load with collaborators. It’s not a sign of weakness to depend on such tricks. The very best work has been done this way. – Paul Graham, Good and Bad Procrastination


> Geniuses are able to pick out the one part of an issue that is truly important. – Walter Isaacson, The Innovators


> Sensing which ideas to ignore is probably more important than generating many of them. – James Austin, Chase, Chance, and Creativity


> Thus, with regard to Francis Crick’s epic DNA research with James Watson, we find Crick remarking: “The major credit I think Jim and I deserve … is for selecting the right problem and sticking to it. It’s true that by blundering about we stumbled on gold, but the fact remains that we were looking for gold.” – James Austin, Chase, Chance, and Creativity


> The late Richard Feynman, a superb physicist, said once as we talked about the laser that the way to tell a great idea is that, when people hear it, they say, “Gee, I could have thought of that.” – Charles Townes, How the Laser Happened



