# Chr. Hansen

Calf gut does not sound promising as a foundation for a successful global business. Yet, when Christian Hansen started out, its sole product was rennet: a complex of enzymes extracted from the fourth stomach of young ruminants, commonly used in cheese production.

In 1874, the company's eponymous founder began commercially producing rennet from the premises of a former metal workshop in Copenhagen. Overseas expansion followed quickly, with representatives selling Hansen's rennet across Europe and a powdered rennet factory opening in America.

Other products soon followed: natural colors for dairy products and starter cultures for foods like yogurt, butter and sour cream. Technological advances also led to most coagulants being made with modern fermentation technology, not animal stomachs. Today, Chr Hansen is the global leader in supplying cultures and enzymes to the food industry, which continues to account for the bulk of its business. 

Next time you bite into a hunk of Gouda, you may want to pause to reflect on the probability that it contains a blend of mesophilic and thermophilic culture strains, a typical Hansen's product. Such starter cultures have several effects on cheese making, as a catalyst for converting milk into cheese and releasing enzymes to enhance flavor during maturation. Traditional dairies keep their own cultures, retaining some of each batch for use in the next, but the result is often inconsistency. Chr. Hansen's cultures address this problem by providing a product that gives reliable outcomes time and again; greater consistency of flavor and texture and usually a superior product. Convincing traditionalist producers to convert to Chr. Hansen can take time, but once the switch is made, the relationship holds fast.

Several reasons explain this. For one, the absolute cost of Hansen's products is low.  Cultures rarely account for more than 1% of customers input expenses, paltry in relation to their effects, which can determine a product's commercial fate. Given the low price, potential savings from switching to a cheap competitor are negligible. Furthermore, cultures tangibly affect food flavor and texture. In yogurt for instance, these features are integral determinants of customer appeal. Tinkering with a successful product formulation is risky. Finally, Hansen product usually improve customer's process efficiency, yielding cost savings on top of the addition of valuable consumer benefits at low cost.

Chr. Hansen's economics also benefit from scale. Biological production is a volume game, with larger batches generating higher margins. The company's global market share, at around 45%, enables it to invest in the largest state-of-the-art production facilities in its market. Competitors lack the throughput to justify comparable investment.  Chr. Hansen's R&D budget is also unmatched in the industry and its effectiveness is amplified by its unparalleled library of biological strains, documented down to the genome. This powerful combination of deep embedded knowledge and continued research spending helps to enshrine Chr. Hansen's leading position and makes it highly unlikely that a new player will attempt to enter the market. 

Hansen's enviable position as a critical, niche supplier to a large industry is reflected in its outstanding financial characteristics. In the latest financial year, operating margin exceeded 25%, return on invested capital was 35%, and sales growth was 8%. This is on a par with is annual achievements since its 2010 initial public offering.  While many companies may proudly produce an essential consumer product, few offer customers such transformative value along with with production gains at such a nugatory cost. Truly a [[Magic Ingredients]]