# Conclusion from Lesson from the Titans

All the companies we study have processes of some kind; that's not what's lacking. But much of that time gets spent on unproductive activities, such as budgeting, forecasting, doing capital planning, and fixing problems that were allowed to linger and grow. What works, instead, is an intense focus on three goals: **containing costs - by reducing waste at every step; manufacturing for repeatable quality; and driving a high level of customer intimacy throughout an organization.*

It works when these are the goals of everyone at the company, and continuous improvement as a mindset becomes central to the culture. At a bare minimum, the companies that effectively employ continuous improvement will gain opportunities through higher cash flow that could be spent on growth.

The best companies are those that have gone a step further and built something different and new, growth companies that are created around operational competence rather than around a product cycle. Danaher and Fortive operate a wide range of businesses arguably better than anyone else in the world, from professional tools to biotech. Roper transitioned from managing industrial assets to software. Transdigm is specialized, but with its tremendous focus on protected niches, it vastly outperforms even other well-managed aerospace suppliers. While it's not immune to today's aerospace woes, its track record of managing through challenges is well established. Manufacturing a quality product that customers demand matters, of course, but what really differentiates is the repeatability of processes, business systems that maximize effort and focus in every direction. The flywheel of success comes when operations generate cash, which is used to invest in more assets, which are then improved.

Lessons on what to avoid are clear. Forecasting end markets many years out is a mistake in driving strategic decisions; it's a well-informed coin flip. GE bet heavily on years of uninterrupted growth in oil and gas industry spending and on spending for fossil fuel-powered electricity generation. Caterpillar believed spending in mining would grow exceptionally and for some time - and now US coal is in a steep spiral down to nothing. GE sold off NBC to make those ill-fated investments just before the media business improved. GE and Caterpillar are extreme examples, but outthinking end markets on growth 5 to 10 years out is a loser's game. To that point, no one could have anticipated either the timing or depth of destruction from the current pandemic. And if forecasting the top line is a remarkable challenge, then forecasting future profitability is even more so. It is a rare management team that would suggest margins will get worse due to market dynamics or their actions. Optimism is universal.

Management plays a critical role in setting goals for an organization and in reinforcing behaviours that support those goals. Incentives matter more than most managers think, and those incentives need to be tuned to the current strategy. The departure of a long-term CEO is an uncertain moment in a company's life, doubly so if the CEO is a legend, like Jack Welch at GE or George David at United Technologies. Investors often tread cautiously during such times, fearful of earnings "big baths" when hidden problems from the prior leadership are surfaced. The bigger danger is that things don't change. A strategy that's run its course, as at United Technologies, needs a careful reevaluation at the CEO and board level. United Technologies was one example, but there are a great many others. Managers who rise through the ranks during the 15 years run by a top CEO are going to be naturally supportive of the older strategy, and they probably have too much hesitation to break out of it. They've spent their careers implementing it, after all. That's one of the most impressive results of Dave Cote's long run of success at Honeywell; he chose a successor in Darius Adamczyk who took the company in a far different and yet still a positive direction.

The right questions definitely exist, for employees exploring their careers and for investors exploring ownership stakes. Management matters, often more than the business itself, over anything other than a short time frame.

We increasingly look for two markers of success. One is humility, a shorthand way of saying the ability to embrace feedback and change, benchmarking, and a method for generating quality feedback. The other is well-established process for feedback, which enables continuous improvement, the core of any successful industrial, though one too often trapped on the factory floor rather than spread throughout the organization. Red flags are the opposite: arrogance, overconfidence, and a strategy of managing tightly to targets, as well as strong bets on end markets, or at least high confidence in making them. Shooting from the hip is dangerous in itself and probably a marker of something missing in its place.

Business books talk about strong leadership, but that often gets placed into military parallels, where larger-than-life, loud men shout out commands. That never seems to work in business. We define "strong" as the ability to plot a reasonable course, communicate the plan, and put people in place who can execute, all while incentivizing and rewarding behaviours that move an organization steadily toward long-term targets, with a continuous improvement mindset.

The best companies have strong cultures, but only as the output of years of sensible actions, disciplined processes, and incentives set by leadership. Every employee knows the mission and works toward some facet of it everyday. It's a fairly obvious trait when you get to know it.

What does all this mean for the new economy? As industry age and competition deepens, newer companies that lack operational discipline will fall, just as hundreds of old economy leaders have done. Feedback loops and continual improvement work in any industry but seem to be lacking in much of the newer tech world. Big-idea cultures without daily management tools eventually go off the rails. Concept businesses and software companies are particularly prone to those risks.

Management of hard assets within the framework of an IP-based company is extra-tricky; Uber and WeWork are good examples. Often the strategy seems to pretend the assets don't have a cost, so everything will work over time. Sometimes the tech economy's crossover into physical assets seems an exercise in pushing as much pain outside the system as can be borne, rather than minimizing costs. That works only so long as there are enough desperate people to take the work, and it leaves itself vulnerable to an actual, profitable business. This is in addition to the clear ethical implications and likelihood that government watchdogs will notice.

The lessons are not complex in theory: measure, develop process, apply incentives, correct as needed, and repeat. The further along that journey gets, the more robust and differentiated it becomes. The moat widens; the culture becomes ingrained.

It's critically important that an organization focus on the little stuff that keeps it on the flywheel. Adopt a business system that focuses on the effort. Benchmark externally and to best-in-class organizations. Encourage a humble culture based on continuous improvement. And promote leadership that understands the critical importance of managing costs, generating increasingly higher cash, and redeploying that cash toward the highest returns. Not difficult at all, but somehow it gets lost with each generation of new companies that are so focused on near-term success, they forget that "long-term" is often right around the corner

