# Constellation Software ([[CSU]]): Culture and M&A

by #InPractise

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise

### How did you wind up at Constellation? What did do while you were there and why did you leave?

I did get a list of questions so happy to rapid fire through those, but to simplify, as a 25 year plus software B2B guy, I've done almost nothing outside of software apart from one real estate private placement thing I worked on and some semiconductor business. But for the rest of my career, it's been B2B software, primarily with mid-market tech companies, directly in operations. I've done some entrepreneurial things as an advisor and an investor shareholder. The first part of my career I was an entrepreneur operator, backing myself into corporate finance, investment banking and M&A from the operator side, doing it all the wrong way; the way founders and management teams of venture-backed and private equity companies did it in the early days. I professionalized that in my time inside KPMG and Deloitte, and over the past eight or nine years, I've been specifically on the investment and buy side.

I did several private company investments, all in software and SaaS businesses over the years. Most of that was given back to the community, but I was fortunate to have an exit of my own of one startup, as well as through investments. That was my background and I ended up at CSI by doing some side work for Constellation, which is very rare as they don't usually hire external consultants to do anything because they're a serial acquirer. I knew the firm back when we did some pre-IPO work at Deloitte and, frankly, I didn't believe in the story. The reputation and understanding of what CSI did among Canadian venture capital, private equity, founders and management teams was that they were a bottom feeder and where software companies went to die. That narrative was primarily created by the Canadian venture capital industry. Mark Leonard worked on a problem set which has been a remarkable multi-decade return on capital for the shareholders. Shame on me for not believing in the stock at $16 a share, and having to come in at around $400 a share.

### That's still very good.

Well yes, but I wish had done it sooner.

### That kept me away from them as well for years before I understood they were not simply buying junkie VMS businesses that were of no terminal value at all.

That miss was, frankly, too late in my career. I joked with the two investment teams that I built up for our portfolio that kids today get to join the serial acquirer in software and if I had done that when I was 23, I probably would have an accelerated career. All jokes aside, you would have seen the performance over time and so I am happy to dive into what's most relevant. What motivated me to move there was I had learned a lot from the buy side work and dispelled a lot of those myths, but also started to learn about the discipline they had and the depth and scrutiny they go through to look at software assets they might acquire. I am happy to dive into whatever thread is most productive for what you guys are trying to achieve, if you can give me a tiny bit of context, as I don't know if you guys are a family office or an institutional investor or what is of most interest to you?

### We're a long only fund and we own concentrated portfolios – only 10 to 12 stocks – and look to hold onto those names for a decade. Constellation is one that we own, so would love to learn more about them. M&A was the next place to go because it drives so much of it, and you ran a team that did M&A and also portfolio management, so how does that work on a big picture level, because you hear about there being 40,000 VMS businesses out there?

It's obviously a public company and I was an executive there and privy to the full results of the individual operating groups, as well as the portfolio companies within. It is a heavily metrics-driven organization who met quarterly, globally, with all portfolio peers, including the operating unit CEOs across seven or eight units. I can talk about open shareholder meetings and events, that operating partners and portfolio managers have attended with peers and others, where those talks have been spoken about publicly. That is just a guardrail I have around confidentiality, on the public side as well as what I signed off on, but I did go through those questions and they are all ones that I can answer. I will have to stop short if the question goes too deep but I think you will get some benefit from it.

### I'll ask away and if you're uncomfortable don't address it and we'll continue.

Mark Leonard, specifically, would talk about the number of VMS businesses around the world. One year into when I was there, they stopped publishing how they talked about it. Maybe they've said things since because I don't follow every president letter and I'm not even sure what they're doing in terms of actual shareholder meetings now. I think they're all Q&A, at least the last one I joined was. Leonard and other operating partners used to talk about that 40,000 and what is more important than the head line number is the global coverage CSI has, particularly through the many operating units there, but also a very rigorous CRM practice, globally, across all the operating units.

The other thing CSI used to publish, which they no longer do, is the number of M&A professionals they have. I had a team of eight to 10 plus five portfolio managers who were all pure M&A professionals. These were either business development professionals who were focused on deploying capital and building out the M&A pipeline globally, or investment professionals that executed and closed on those deals. As portfolio managers, teams and GMs in the business, we would do the deep operating metrics and performance management on a monthly basis. I remember talking to Leonard about it early on and I had seen the same thing with the Canadian technology industry at KPMG.

Every year we would want to grow the business by 35% and focused entirely on mid-market tech and software businesses. Every year we thought we were going to run out of market, and every year we dug in deeper and panicked about the following year's growth plan, but we found another 150 to 250 companies we never knew the names of. CSI has done that for two decades now, at scale, in every jurisdiction where you would want to buy a software business. That pans in that culture, methodology and approach in that M&A execution team on the pure deploying capital side, and it is really quite remarkable.

### Yes, they are up to 100 acquisitions a year now which is amazing.

Yes, and none of them are even material in the portfolios. I was part of an exec team that had, at the time, 150 million of ARR in it. We were doing a handful of deals a year at scale for CSI so to do 100 in any given year is remarkable, especially since their core business is buying small VMS businesses.

### Do you think that's sustainable to continue to scale?

When I was in Deloitte Consulting, we would regularly court CSI to say they need to do shared services, take out synergies, combine businesses and all the obvious things you would do as a traditional private equity investor, and Mark Leonard is deep into the philosophy of having decentralization. They have publicly announced it and you can see it in how the operating units have grown over time. I remember talking to Mark Miller at a KPMG CEO forum, with 100 CEOs in the room. I told him that he was manufacturing leaders in the business who will deploy capital and get the free cash flow out of those acquisitions. Software is almost only a platform to get there. Those were my words and it was something Mark and I had talked about and is very much the way they approach things. One of the notes that came back was that I'm no longer a shareholder, which is not the case. I am still a shareholder and, obviously, I'm not giving public market commentary but, even with the current volatility, I have no plans to sell my CSI stock.

### Me neither.

It will probably be better if we face things. When I went in there, I had spent my entire career dealing with other investors who paid way more than CSI. During my entire sales side time at both Deloitte and KPMG, we sold three businesses out of 100 to CSI. They simply were not a buyer we sought because we didn't understand their fundamental target market. As a seller and deployer of capital at CSI, the value prop they have to sellers and that market, there were many CSI copy cats. It's a weird Canadian thing; we have four firms doing it now. I guess enough of the institutional investors in Canada realized what CSI was doing and you could get amazing cash flow out of it, but the execution is the tough part, and they're doing that at scale.

Every one of those operating partner leaders, their second and third tiers and right down to the GM level, are free cash flow generating people, it is a remarkable system, especially given that it is decentralized. Leonard doesn’t talk as much about it as he used to, but if you've read all the previous president letters or been part of any of the earnings calls, that is core to the philosophy and something I don't even think about as a shareholder; I know that is how they have scaled it.

Mark Miller, Jeff Bender and Brian, that whole team and the teams they have built around them, could be separate public companies. I bet you could run a comp table of all of them and the variance would be very little. There is nothing rocket science about what they have done; it is about a tireless metrics-driven execution. Unsophisticated sellers vend into the machine but it was the most rigorous operating and performance management thing I have done in my career at the operating level, because it is that granular. It is not a holding or an arm's length thing; it is a very active management style.

### How many people were in your team that was doing decentralized M&A?

Without giving any of the secret sauce away, it's a decentralized structure so you can do your own math on how that works. At my level – and there was only one level above – the entire conversation you would have with the CEO of your operating unit is, what are you doing to scale your people? We're going to double your capital deployment target next year. You want that, we want that; what are you doing to build your team? That sounds very generic, but it's a very specific thing, and it cascades down into all the corporate stuff around MBOs and performance management, issuing MOUs and all kinds of other levers. I left because of the international travel burden on me, having two kids in high school. I might go back to CSI when my kids are out of the house. I also had a chance on a deal I had sold to another private equity firm with a founder who I wanted to get behind, but it was more about getting off planes, which I didn't achieve but at least I did in North America for the most part. After that, Covid hit and we were all lucky for that.

### You mentioned, in your prior life, you had sold only three businesses to CSI out of 100; that implies there wasn't much competition. Do they have competition for the things they're buying? You would think so among private equity VMS buyers?

It is hard work and is not at scale work. It is the cycle with most private equity funds, growth equity or traditional private equity at least in software, which is the only thing I know. You don't have to do that much operating work because they have operating partners and guys like me, but it's a ton of work and it's small scale. There is no market for the sellers in what is the mainstay of what Constellation acquires, but there is more competition now. There is more competition between the operating units than the sum of the parts of all competitors. They like to call them copy cats but it is not rocket science; they are a value buyer operator, which is not a unique thing. There is another Canadian company you probably have in your comp called Enghouse, which Steve Sadler started up. There is also Banyan Capital which is yet to go public and there is another who has gone public. I will not invest in any of them, and Sadler is a close second, globally, as a software investor. I haven't bought his stock and I know him well, met with him quarterly for three years and still see him every year or so.

### Are the hurdles of getting this right much more difficult?

The hurdle, the execution, the operating discipline afterwards, to get to the metrics, the clear and obvious diversification. Not only geographically, but there is not a single business which is material to an operating unit, other than the deal Bender did for the Quebec-based portfolio they bought, which remains the only debt deal they did; they don't leverage things. They'll do that more with the new strategy to do larger deals and they're going to use debt to help with that hurdle rate. It's going to take some time for them to get that but they will get deals done.

I spent more than a third of my career on the sell side and there's tons of broken processes and mid-market deals that are never going to get done. The software B2B market is very book-ended, with buyers like CSI, and 75% of US private growth equity, minority or otherwise, is focused on software and on ARR growth businesses. 70% of that market is in this mid-market dead zone; a $30 million ARR business which will have 10% growth but might have done 0 or -5 the year before and is only kicking out 5% to 12% EBITDA and never gets close to or over 40. That mid-market play will be interesting when they point the machine properly. They have eight operating units who will do that, all with very senior investment executives. I don't want to overstate it, but it evergreens; like Leonard stated the 40,000 number on several calls, we watched that number grow in our CRM.

The venture market in software will continue to have its 1 in 10 or 2 in 10 model and then there will be the C portfolio which has nowhere to go and will be long in the tooth and will have not sold a dozen times; CSI will be there to buy those businesses. The other side is the bar and the debate we had publicly and privately about what is a mission critical business and how you very specifically price on your net recurring revenue against growth and mission criticality. That is an art I will die learning about daily. I have been a pretty good buyer and seller of it but I'm a student compared to the operating level guys in that organization, who are so clear about their market.

They are very clear about which deals belong to them and how to get value creation and think about risk. Mark published several high-performing conglomerates letters but if you have read them, I don't need to go into the detail. One of them was Jack Henry who Mark had a ton of respect for. If Jack Henry didn't already have its own shareholder value, it would be the best business CSI could ever buy, but they will have to trip on their shoelaces for at least a decade for that to happen. That high-performing conglomerate became a thing for us when we thought about return on invested capital.

### You mentioned the lower hurdle rate they have now, and last year they had tremendous capital deployment. Is that a true step change or motivated by Covid?

I would not conclude that the lower hurdle rate is tied to anything more than the larger deals like the one they did with ACL. Leonard set up a team to do just that and I thought about going back to CSI, because I'm a more of a mid-market too. I've done lots of the small ones but I like doing the mid-market deals because that's what I've been doing since. That is the only place – and they've talked about that in at least one letter and one call – where they are going out to the banker market to try and make them understand that we can compete with these deals. We've been on enough, even in our portfolio, where we were very close to winning. We actually won one of them which my team executed and closed soon after I left. That was a mid-market deal exactly like the ones they will do in that group, but the model has not changed in the rest of the portfolio and, as an investor, that is obviously a good thing.

### Shifting to portfolio management, one of the things I would love to get your thoughts on is this question of how do VMS businesses die, or have you ever had to close down, sell or merge a business in CSI into another company in the portfolio?

That is a touchy subject because it gets beyond the philosophy, but let me talk about the philosophy to help answer that question. There are clearly under-performing units in any portfolio and while we were very metrics-driven we were also long in hold. To this day, at least as far as we knew, no business had ever been sold, unless you can argue the Dutch spin out one, who did his deal differently. I'm being careful because I can't remember what was actually disclosed in that, but it was obviously not 100% purchase, which is the only time they ever did that.

### The question was more about how these VMS businesses die?

Yes, so that's the party line and, as I understand it, the reality to this day. But I was in one of the six operating units at the time and don't propose to know every little thing that happened at the Leonard office level, and there were very small businesses in there. One thing you've probably picked up that's the reverse of it, is that often when we had under-performing businesses, we would split them up. There was a lot of pressure to split businesses up because this decentralizing thing wasn't only for people to appoint capital, it was also in the portfolio companies. They would be more likely to split that business up and button it down, then see where it goes, than to simply consolidate it. You can track how brands have come out of brands in the portfolio to see that, so I couldn't be specific on it.

### I can ask it in a different way, what is your feeling on the staying power of these businesses or do they face many competitive threats? I am trying to get a sense for their buying and your early narrative was that they were buying junk, which is not the case, but looking at these software companies, do they still have staying power?

Let me start high level and go as deep as I can on that. Because they are mission critical businesses, they tend to be core systems and we priced accordingly across a narrow spectrum of what was mission critical. I certainly didn't know, to the level of granularity, how old some of the software is that runs mission critical functions. I wish I had understood that earlier in my career but I use that discipline every time I look at a software business now. That mission criticality is a lot of the art and science of getting it right, and the scrutiny on it I mentioned before, is that predictable recurring revenue that we rely on.

The threats are obviously that Software as a Service has been a real concern for a long time. Many of the businesses which have even been acquired are more SaaS like and some of them are SaaS businesses now. CSI's value prop is unique to the seller, despite how much they pay, because when that magic lines up, there are few choices. A new generation of entrepreneurs have built more modern code that is entering the CSI world, and because it's mission critical and they do a good job with the portfolio companies of product road mapping and R&D investment and getting the EBITDA returns out of the businesses to reinvest, that is evolving. I don't lay awake thinking the time will come, as it is an evergreen cycle which renews itself.

Most assets for sale now are a decade in to having a hosted managed service or SaaS offering, and the value prop is timeless in terms of getting your target market right. I don't think, in my lifetime, the inflow of capital into those businesses, whether organic or through venture in the early days, will become a return for an investor. Where founders cannot continue to invest, there will be a market for those sellers for a long time, unless CSI dropped their rigor around predictable recurring revenue, which is obviously not unique to them. All the PE and growth equity guys I've dealt with since then were keenly focused on that, but I can tell from talking to and doing deals and bidding on businesses with pure software growth and private equity and ventures, CSI runs circles around them.

### Are there different economics in these software businesses on the public versus private client side or does it not matter?

Inherently, any vertical market business is in a very specific market, usually a tier 2 or 3 market. CSI dislike customer concentration but own many businesses with customer concentration. They simply priced for them and knew how to build deal structuring to mitigate risk and how to run those businesses with the owners or key employees afterward. I don't see a big difference between a public or private buyer. CSI had a sister company within GI Partners called MRI Software, and Jeff Bender sits on the board. That sort of VMS market is one that others are doing. It inherently tends to be more smaller or mid-sized customers. There are many governments and industry associations as well as small, mid-market and low ticket. There are low ticket and big ticket businesses across the portfolio. One of the biggest units in our group was transit and global transit is massive for all of CSI. They compete and win the biggest transit agencies in the world day in, day out and are decades into renewing those annual contracts. On the corporate side, not as much in enterprise but that varies by end market and customer.

### Are more of these software companies cloud-based businesses?

CSI mixed business models which included professional services, traditional recurring license and maintenance revenue streams and even managed service contracts, and know how to price accordingly for the different streams of revenue. If you asked me five years ago if I was worried about how many CSI customers, vendors and portfolio companies in their overall portfolio were legacy license and maintenance customers, versus today, with what I said earlier about the natural evolution of sellers and technology, I do not worry about that. It's not like they're trying to win some big contract against ServiceNow who has a $5 million ARR contract with a big corporate. You would be hard-pressed to find 20 companies in the global CSI portfolio who sell to large enterprises. They don't tend to face a threat to losing to a large player as a competitor when renewals are up or when trying to win new business. Deep domain vertical market expertise is important to big and small customers and wins the day.

### Leonard talks about how to keep people incentivized as the organization grows; how do they do that?

How it's set up varies by level in terms of the after stock, after tax investment in shares that you make, which is unconventional in itself. The ESOP tax treatment in Canada means if you are exec, manager or even an employee and using your bonus to buy shares with after-tax dollars, even in an ESOP plan you've got an unfair advantage because you can treat it properly, but you do it because you buy it, essentially, as a restricted stock share; there is a vesting period for it. I'm not sure many employees in our portfolio companies fully understood it. They would be like any other retail investor who works for a company and you can buy a share if you believe in it, but for those of us where a meaningful part of our compensation was mandated that you had to put a portion of your bonus towards that, you happily did it every year. I even joke that I wonder if I should have destroyed my family life for two more years so that I would have a better wealth creation down the road.

### In your experience managing these teams, were you able to keep the talent of promising people?

It's a crazy hard market and the pandemic has made it even worse. My biggest challenge now is hiring and retaining and it sounds like everybody said that forever, but it's pervasive in the industry. There's churn in investment professionals and CSI is a tough culture. The GI guys used to tell me that CSI is a hard place to work, but awesome if you want to learn and grow and have long-term value creation. They also take risks on and invest in people, which has been well-documented by Leonard and all his spin-offs. Performance management and people development is a huge part of it. Every time I saw Mark Miller in the hallway he asked me, what are you doing to grow your people? I hear John Doe is really awesome; how are you going to make him a portfolio leader? You're talking about somebody with five years as an associate?

### What does the future of Constellation look like in five to 10 years? Is it the same structure or will they be doing bigger deals?

I've been outside for three or four years so I'm not close and none of us talk in detail about things I can talk to you about, which are public, especially now I'm on the other side, but the market will continue to renew because the discipline is so distributed now. The last shareholder meeting I physically attended was more than two years ago and if I had to take my after-tax dollars, as a retail investor, and invest in any one of those portfolios, I wouldn't need to see the IM. I'm not being cute in saying that; they are all rock stars and I'm not talking with any current agenda. I'm outside the company and talking to you as a shareholder to shareholder.

Could it get weird and become a sitcom if Leonard passes and people go rogue? I don't think that will happen because it is so solid. Anyone who is at any senior level there is a career executive. It's not only the portfolio CEO leaders, it's also the portfolios leaders one tier down and the CFOs in the unit. Harvard should do a whole co-op with any investment professional at Constellation Software.

### I'm curious if you have any opinions on Topicus as a spin-off and whether you think they might do more of that in the future or is that a unique situation because they never acquired 100% of it?

It's hard for me to say but I don't think any of us were surprised by that. Clearly, all the operating CEOs run large businesses now and they are all candidates for outcomes. CSI has a free cash flow generating problem which is, obviously, a good problem, and you've seen it in some of the changes in dividend strategy over time. We thought about it in our operating units and I wonder if some of the operating unit guys are pissed it happened with that deal and it's not theirs, but all of them have tremendous respect for the discipline. They could all be copy cats tomorrow; it's deep enough in the rafters. But they're all investors and shareholders and understand CSI is the Warren Buffet of the software industry. When I was there, guys said it would be a $2,000 stock and it happened way sooner than we thought. Could it reach $10,000 or $30,000? As the Warren Buffet of the software industry, it might.

### Do you have any thoughts on the new internal VC fund they launched?

That was in Volaris and Karl and Mark Miller launched that. They will do well at it; they won't pay VC valuations and will have all the discipline.

### Is that something they were doing before or is this a new thing?

It's a new thing. I wasn't surprised when it happened because I knew Mark's aspirations. Is it a fear system for a control position or to enable them to exit businesses without giving up the purity of the model? It's more pragmatic than that, but I don't know.

### Is there anything else?

It won't materialize in my life time.

### Is there anything else you want to throw in that we haven't talked about because we're close to the end of our time and we did run through my questions?

If you had any others, we can cover that off and I'll take a second to think about, there are so many nuggets. If I think about it from a pure investor perspective, there were very few US institutional investors in the stock for the first 15 years, but the institutional market now knows who CSI is. It's remarkable how stealthy they have been and it's Leonard's style. You can barely find a picture of the guy on the internet; I think there are only two.

### He no longer writes letters so it's harder to become a shareholder.

It's about the discipline around that high-performing conglomerate mindset. The latitude of Leonard's mind and the teams he's built around him, will do some creative things which are risk-adjusted to ensure they deliver return. I sound like their IR guy which they don't have, but I don't mean to be that way. In hindsight, I wish I had not messed around with 40 other technology investments over the years and only bought that stock.

### It seems it still has a long runway based on our conversation today.

There are several other themes I didn't explicitly answer, but Covid has got nothing to do with the decision making around 5% of the sellers that they bought last year. I've never competed at higher valuations in the last 24 months than I have in my whole career. Before March 2020, we didn't know if we were going to hit the beach because we were at the peak of a B2B software market. They deployed more capital which points to the under-served market rather than to a macro thing like Covid. We joked about ever seeing a downturn, so we can be a better buyer, but that joke is four years old now, and it never stopped, good times or bad.

### An interesting insight from this conversation is I didn't realize opportunities had to be found and dug out; I had this idea they were out there and people knew what they were?

On the institutional investor side?

### On VMS companies in general and the whole M&A universe, it sounds like Constellation has to do a lot of work to source and find deals?

It is heavy lifting and most buyers have to kiss 12 frogs but they get 5X that. The one thing I hadn't thought about is, in a more inflationary environment, does that create a problem for where most of the organic growth comes for CSI, which is well-documented? Organic growth has always been a challenge so does the magic of being able to do price increases on mission critical businesses get you an organic growth rate that isn't commercial organic growth rate? Does that weigh on the thesis? Neither you or I will know if we have a long period of higher inflation that could affect that, but that's something I haven't thought about that I should probably think about as little as I can do proper analysis on it.

### It depends on the magnitude of inflation and the price increases.

For most good software companies, you don't only have to talk about CSI; just look at the fact that Oracle have done remarkably well for 2.5 decades, with 8% consistent price increases. Jack Henry run mission critical and are also good at price increases, but CPI plus with 6% inflation is tougher.

### Thank you, this has been helpful and I appreciate all your insights.
