# Costco Annual Letter 2015

**Dear Costco Shareholders,**

Fiscal 2015, which ended August 30, 2015, represented another year of record sales and earnings for Costco! Sales totaled USD 113.7 billion during the fiscal year; and net income increased 15 percent to USD 2.4 billion, or USD 5.37 per share. Additionally, our fiscal 2015 operating cash flows, along with our strong balance sheet, enabled us to invest nearly USD 2.4 billion into our business, while at the same time return over USD 3.3 billion to shareholders in the form of dividends (USD 2.9 billion, including a special cash dividend of USD 5.00 per share) and share repurchases ($481 million). These accomplishments were possible because of the dedication and hard work of our more than 200,000 Costco employees around the world. Looking ahead, we are optimistic about Costco’s future, and continue to invest in growing our businesses in the U.S. and around the world. 

During the fiscal year, our membership base grew by more than six percent; and we ended fiscal 2015 with more than 81 million cardholders worldwide. Member loyalty – as measured by renewal rates and shopping frequency – continued to reach record levels in 2015: 91% of members in the U.S. and Canada and 88% worldwide renewed their memberships; and shopping frequency, year-over-year, increased four percent. Executive Members, an increasing percentage of our total membership base, now represent over one-third of our members and nearly two-thirds of our sales. 

In terms of merchandising, we continued to expand both our Kirkland Signature product offerings, as well as new brand-named items. This past year, new Kirkland Signature items included Kirkland Signature organic 2% milk, organic liquid eggs, organic coconut water, artisan breads, and light beer. Sales of all organic products at Costco continued to grow, topping $4 billion during the fiscal year. New non-food Kirkland Signature items in 2015 included new apparel and cookware; and new brand names offered this past year included Cole Haan shoes, Chi hair products, Brown Jordan patio furniture and SK-II skin care products. 

Costco’s e-commerce business grew over 20% in 2015 to $3.4 billion in sales. We finished the fiscal year with operations in four countries – the U.S., Canada, U.K. and Mexico – and have since opened an online site in Korea. During the fiscal year, we upgraded our e-commerce distribution network by adding new depot distribution points, allowing us to deliver orders faster and reduce shipping costs. We continued to leverage our inline vendor relationships to enhance our online offerings and prices, with particular success in electronics, apparel and household goods. We also leveraged our inlocation traffic to drive online sales of jewelry, as well as larger-sized products, such as electronics and appliances, mattresses, exercise equipment and furniture. Lastly, we expanded our merchandise mix to include additional products in infant care, apparel, health and beauty aids, and cosmetics. 

In mainland China, we are selling Costco products on Alibaba’s Tmall site. Two hundred Costco items, including many Kirkland Signature products, are now being offered to online shoppers in China. In addition, other ecommerce delivery businesses, including Google Express, Instacart, Boxed, and Jet.com, offer Costco products for delivery through their own online services. 

Costco’s ancillary businesses – gasoline stations, pharmacies, optical and hearing aid centers, food courts, and travel – all performed well in 2015. Sales increased in all of these operations, with the exception of our gasoline business, where the average sales price per gallon was lower by 22% year-over-year. Profits in these businesses were also up. We continue to expand our gasoline operations globally, with almost all new U.S. and Canadian warehouses opening with gasoline stations; and other international locations adding stations where regulations allow and space permits. As of calendar 2015 year-end, 490 gasoline stations were in operation. Finally, our travel business, Costco Travel, had an exceptional year in 2015.

In terms of expansion, we continued opening new warehouses in 2015 – in the U.S. and globally – both in-fill and in new markets. Costco’s appeal, strong in North America for many years, has translated very well to the international marketplace; and international expansion is a key element in our business strategy. For the fiscal year, 23 new warehouses were opened: twelve in the U.S., one in Canada; and ten in other international markets, including three new warehouses in Mexico; three in Japan; and one each in the U.K., Korea, Taiwan, and Australia. These openings brought our total warehouse count at fiscal year-end to 686 warehouses in operation: 480 in the United States and Puerto Rico; 89 in Canada; 36 in Mexico; 27 in the United Kingdom; 23 in Japan; 12 in Korea; 11 in Taiwan; seven in Australia; and one in Spain. 

We are now four months into fiscal 2016; and our current plan is to open up to 32 new warehouses this year: 22 in the U.S., three in Canada, two each in Japan and Australia, and one each in the U.K., Taiwan, and Spain. To date, in fiscal 2016, twelve new Costco warehouses have already been opened. 

As we continue the global growth of our Company we must build and operate our business in a responsible and sustainable manner. In this regard, we are committed to protecting the sustainability of our business, which involves many dimensions, including our workforce, a continuing supply of merchandise for our customers, a supply chain that protects the environment, as well as the workers and animals in the supply chain, and the efficient use and reuse of resources associated with our operations. Our customers, shareholders, employees, regulators and others are increasingly focused on sustainability; and we are enhancing our efforts in these challenging areas.

Earlier this year, Ben Carson and Bill Gates retired from our Board of Directors. We thank Ben and Bill for their significant contributions during their many years of dedicated service. More recently, two new members were added to Costco’s Board – Maggie Wilderotter and John Stanton. Maggie is the Executive Chairman of Frontier Communications, and previously served as Frontier’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board. Her broad-ranging experience includes senior leadership positions in the areas of telecommunications and technology. John is Chairman of Trilogy International Partners, Inc., and Trilogy Equity Partners. He is a wireless industry pioneer and former top executive at companies including McCaw Cellular and Clearwire; and earlier founded and served as Chairman and CEO of Western Wireless Corporation. 

Preserving and enhancing our Company culture developed over more than three decades remains an “imperative” as Costco expands its operations domestically and internationally. We remain focused on exceeding the expectations of our stakeholders – our members, our employees, our suppliers and our shareholders – each and every day. These are our challenges for 2016 and in the years to come; and we are confident that the entrepreneurial and innovative spirit at every level and in every region of our global company will sustain our growth and continue exceptional performance.

As always, we extend our best wishes to you and your families for a joyous holiday season and a healthy, happy and prosperous New Year. 

Best Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Craig Jelinek