# Cost of Working Capital
Working capital refers to the resources deployed short term to generate revenue: short-term assets such as inventory, less short-term liabilities such as account payable.

While inventory and receivables eventually turn into cash, until then they are tied up in the production and sales process. Companies enjoy some offset because their suppliers likewise extend them credit, but most carry net-positive working capital.

Among European companies, working capital represents approximately 16% of sales. A company's overall working capital burden reflects its bargaining power with other stakeholders: those positioned to dictate terms typically enjoy more attractive working capital profiles.

For companies that grow, associated costs of working capital rise. Growth means more money is stuck in transit as inventory or unpaid bills. If a company ties up 10% of incremental sales in net working capital, then a significant percentage of cash that could have landed in investors's pockets will not. The incremental working capital required for growth is critical as it reduces cash flow growth, and hence the company's value creation. So companies that tie up very little extra working capital with incremental sales tend to be more attractive.

Most companies must beat the costs of carrying at least some working capital. Those best-positioned to mitigate the money-drain are those able to produce at low costs (less cash tied to inventory) or to operate with rapid inventory and receivables turnover: they speed up the time it takes to produce and compress the time it takes to collect. In some rare and attractive cases, working capital is negative: cash is held rather than deployed, making for a benefit rather than a cost. The most common examples are industries that require pre-payments, such as software and insurance (see [[Float]]).