# Costco Annual Letter 2012

**Dear Costco Shareholders,**

We are pleased to report that we had a very successful fiscal 2012. Despite an environment of ongoing economic challenges, and an ever-changing, but always fierce, competitive landscape, our Company achieved record sales and earnings for the third consecutive year. These accomplishments are the result of the hard work of the more than 170,000 Costco employees around the world; our agility and innovation in the marketplace; and an unwavering commitment to provide our members with the best value for high quality goods and services. While we are not impervious to tough economic conditions, great companies can grow and increase market share during economic downturns; and we believe Costco achieved just that in 2012.

Costco’s 2012 operating performance was successful in many areas: 
- Net sales for the 53-week fiscal year were up 11.5 percent, to $97 billion, from the prior 52-week fiscal year sales of $87 billion; and adjusting for the extra week, up 9.5  percent. Comparable sales in warehouses open more than one year increased seven percent. 
- These sales results were positively impacted by increases in both shopper frequency and the average amount spent by members on each visit. 
- Membership fees increased more than 11%, due to the impact of raising our annual membership fees in the U.S. and Canada last year; strong member renewal rates; good sign-ups at new warehouses; increased penetration of the Executive Membership program; and the extra (53rd) week of operations in 2012. We were particularly pleased that our membership renewal rates increased to our highest rate ever – nearly 90% in the U.S. and Canada and over 86% on a worldwide basis. 
- Our gross margin (net sales less merchandise costs) as a percent of net sales decreased in fiscal 2012, largely due to our investment in lowering prices, which is consistent with our goal of maintaining price and value leadership. This is what we do…each and every day!
- Our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percent of net sales decreased by 17 basis points (from 9.98% to 9.81%). This is especially gratifying, since driving down our expense ratios was a key goal for Costco in 2012. This decrease was largely due to improvement in our warehouse operating costs (particularly payroll) and the leveraging of operating expenses with strong sales results. 
- Overall, our 2012 net income increased 17% to $1.71 billion, or $3.89 per share, compared to $1.46 billion or $3.30 per share in 2011. These were the best results in Costco’s 29-year history. Our cash flow remained strong in 2012, and was highlighted by the following: 
	- Our world-wide operations generated over $3 billion in operating cash flow; 
	- Capital expenditures totaled nearly $1.5 billion in 2012, for new warehouses and depots, as well as for expansion of our ancillary business operations; 
	- In March, we paid down $900 million of 5.3% senior notes, reducing our interest expense by approximately $45 million per year; 
	- In July, we purchased the 50% interest in our 32-warehouse Costco Mexico operation from our joint-venture partner for $789 million; and 
	- We returned to shareholders over USD 1 billion, in the form of dividends (USD 446 million) and share buy-backs ($632 million) of over seven million shares in 2012.


Costco is now one of the largest retailers in the U.S., and seventh-largest in the world. More important than any ranking, however, is our ability to remain focused on the core values of our business: driving down expenses; offering our members great products and services at the lowest possible prices; and being a responsible corporate citizen. We are proud to accomplish this while providing great wages and benefits to our employees. It is a model that will allow for continued growth and opportunities well into the future. 

The loyalty of Costco members is critical to our success. Our members continue to recognize the Costco value proposition: great prices; great quality; and outstanding service. Our record renewal rates in 2012 were particularly encouraging considering that in November 2011, we increased membership fees for the first time in more than five years. Ultimately, increasing sales is critical to our success. In 2012, our annual sales per warehouse remained at industry-leading levels, as did our comparable warehouse sales increases. The number of warehouses that exceeded $200 million in annual sales volume rose from 93 locations in 2011 to 134 locations during 2012; and eight of those warehouses exceeded $300 million in annual sales. 

Member service has always been an area of emphasis for our employees. The way we treat our members defines who we are – it is an essential part of our corporate culture: Take Care Of Our Members. When people pay for the right to shop, they expect and deserve our full attention and respect – and we strive to do this with each and every member visit. In this vein, our employees are Costco’s most important asset; and their attention to “member service” is one of our greatest strengths. 

Costco opened 17 locations in fiscal 2012, including the reopening of our Tamasakai warehouse in suburban Tokyo, which was significantly damaged by the Tohoku Earthquake in March 2011. New warehouses were opened in Bucks County, Pennsylvania; Frisco, Texas; Pewaukee, Wisconsin; Augusta, Georgia; Yawata Kyoto, Zama, and Kobe, Japan; Ancaster, Ontario (a relocation); Pharr, Texas; Huntington Beach, California; Coralville, Iowa; Chicago (South Loop), Illinois; Pittsfield Township, Michigan; Sarasota, Florida; Taoyuan, Taiwan and Ulsan, Korea. 

In the first four months of fiscal 2013, prior to calendar 2012 year end, we opened 14 additional new warehouses: West Edmonton, Alberta; West Fargo, North Dakota; Baxter and Rochester, Minnesota; Spanish Fork, Utah; Farragut, Tennessee; Concordville, Pennsylvania; East Peoria, Illinois; Sun Prairie, Wisconsin; Drummondville, Quebec; Oshawa, Ontario; Washington, D.C.; Leicester, England; and Gwangmyeong, Korea. Including these 14 openings, we plan to open approximately 30 new warehouses in fiscal 2013. 

Costco also continues to expand its ancillary business offerings, including pharmacies, optical and hearing aid centers, and gas stations. These businesses are great examples of how we can achieve high standards of excellence, drive more sales and profitability, and enhance the value of a Costco membership.

Costco pharmacies, now a $4+ billion retail business, are renowned for their value; and we regularly receive notes from members complimenting both our pharmacists and technicians. Costco’s low prices on both brand-name and generic prescriptions are well-known, and we have gained our members’ trust for their healthcare needs. Such a relationship is invaluable when it comes to health-related services, and we have extended that trust into our optical and hearing aid businesses, as well. 

Costco Optical operated in 589 locations during 2012, selling over three million pairs of prescription glasses and contact lenses, and generating sales of nearly $900 million. The optometrists working in our optical departments are among the highest-rated in the industry, and along with our trained opticians offer a level of care and service that is unmatched.

Costco’s hearing aid centers offer top quality hearing products (including the highly-rated Kirkland Signature hearing aid) at prices well below the industry norm. Sales in our 469 hearing aid centers exceeded $200 million in 2012, an increase of 22 percent from the previous year.

Costco’s gas stations continue to be an integral part of our operation. Gasoline prices were particularly volatile this past year due to refinery down-times, hurricanes and droughts. Nevertheless, we were able to continue to offer great prices to our members. Our gasoline sales were up nearly 20% in 2012 – to over $10 billion. That translates into nearly three billion gallons of gasoline sold in 2012.

Costco’s fresh meat, bakeries, service delis and fresh produce have all become signature departments within the warehouse. Each of these departments has developed an outstanding reputation among our members for quality and value, and our buyers continue to improve our product mix in these areas. With increasing levels of global sourcing, we are able to offer a wide variety of fresh produce throughout the year. Demand for organic foods is up, and Costco is responding with organics in produce, poultry and ground beef. Our sustainability program includes supporting sustainable fisheries and agriculture around the globe.

Costco’s buyers constantly work to bring new Kirkland Signature products to market. Our Kirkland Signature private label items must meet or exceed the quality of the leading national brands, and must offer our members the greatest value for their dollar. New Kirkland Signature items in 2012 included a number of food products, such as Kirkland Signature chocolate chips, organic canned tomato products, honey, coffee, a variety of new wine and spirits offerings, and several women’s and men’s apparel items.

Although we continue to expand our Kirkland Signature merchandise offerings, we also continue to bring our members the latest, most interesting brand name merchandise at exceptional values. This kind of merchandise not only sells well, but helps to create a “buzz” among our members. In 2012, our buyers added popular brands like Bose electronics, Calphalon cookware, Tommy Bahama loungewear, and Tommy Hilfiger men’s and women’s apparel, to name a few. 

Costco’s Ecommerce business also grew in 2012. Our electronic commerce web sites (www.costco.com in the U.S. and www.costco.ca in Canada) generated sales exceeding $2.1 billion. We introduced mobile apps for Apple and Android devices during 2012, and in early fiscal year 2013 our Ecommerce website was re-platformed – for improved user experience as well as increased growth capability. Additionally, we added a web site in the United Kingdom (www.costco.co.uk) in late October. 

As our Company continues to grow, we are very cognizant of our responsibility to build and maintain our business in a sustainable and environmentally responsible manner. In 2012 we continued our sustainability efforts with a four-fold approach: reducing our carbon footprint (through greenhouse gas reduction); enhancing our warehouse energy management systems; expanding our packaging design initiatives; and further developing our recycling and waste stream management systems. We have reduced the amount of waste we send to landfills through the use of additional recycling and composting measures, as well as grease recovery systems in our rotisserie chicken operations. 

The global impact of our business, particularly in terms of how we manage our extensive supply chain, is a priority for Costco buyers. The increasing demand for quality goods is such that we can positively affect how those products are sourced and sustained. We continue working to identify items that can be significantly improved in both quality and quantity through basic investment in less-developed countries, with the result that we improve the lives of those involved. For example, Costco works to build programs with our suppliers and nonprofit organizations on the ground in countries that supply several important commodities, such as vanilla from Uganda, cocoa from Cote d’Ivoire and coffee from Rwanda. These programs assist growers with critical needs, such as training in high-yield, sustainable farming, clean water systems, housing, health care and education. The end result is a higher quality product, a fair price for everyone in the supply chain, including the grower, and a more sustainable supply. We don’t consider these purely philanthropic endeavors. They are straightforward strategies for ensuring the fair treatment of our suppliers, while providing our members with the quality products they demand, and at the same time growing our business. 

This global perspective was an enduring theme for our Company in 2012 and will be into the future. It permeates almost every aspect of our business, and our employees are committed to embracing a larger, more complex global landscape, with the same “keep-it-simple” philosophy that has driven our success over the years.

We expect 2013, our 30th year of operation, to be a challenge for many around the world. However, we consider Costco to be in a strong position for continued growth and profitability. Rest assured that we will continue to focus on growing long-term shareholder value by adhering to the policies and practices that made Costco the Company it is today. 

On behalf of the 174,000 Costco employees worldwide, we thank you, our shareholders, for your investment in Costco and your continued support of our Company. We look forward to seeing many of you at our Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 24, 2013, in Bellevue, Washington. Best wishes to you and your loved ones for a wonderful holiday season and a healthy, happy and prosperous New Year. 

Warm Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Craig Jelinek