# Costco Annual Letter 2019


**Dear Shareholders:**

Since we opened our doors in 1983, the world and the retail landscape have changed. The same might be said of our business, which as of the end of fiscal 2019 had grown to 782 locations, extending across multiple international borders, 254,000 employees, and 99 million Costco cardholders. With the many successes we have realized over these past 36 years, one thing has remained constant. We have remained true to our core values of doing the right thing, operating efficiently, and providing great, quality goods and services at very low prices. Our commitment to these tenets resulted in another strong year. In fiscal 2019, net sales for the 52-week year totaled $149 billion, an increase of 8%, with a comparable sales increase of 6%. Net income was $3.66 billion, or $8.26 per share, an increase of 17%. Revenue from membership fees increased 7% to $3.35 billion. In the United States and Canada, our membership renewal rate reached a record high of 91%, while worldwide our renewal rate was 88%.


This year, we opened our first Costco in China (West Shanghai). With over 139,000 membership sign-ups by opening day, the reception was exceptional, and we look forward to future China openings. Additional warehouse openings in 2019 included 16 in the United States, one in the United Kingdom, one in Australia and one in Korea. We will continue to explore opportunities to grow worldwide. We also believe continued investment in logistics and vertical integration will reap benefits for our members, our business, and our shareholders. We expanded our depot operations and rolled out the first of several planned e-commerce fulfillment automation operations. Our poultry complex in Nebraska recently opened, and a joint partnership to develop a greenhouse will yield fresh organic lettuce out of California in fiscal 2020.

We continue to improve our members’ experiences, the successes of which have been validated by solid comparable sales results, shopping frequency, and membership renewals. Our expansion of self-checkout in the U.S. and Canada has benefited our warehouse operations and members by providing a more rapid and autonomous option for completing purchases, and we will continue expanding this program. Pickup lockers, which allow members to purchase certain merchandise online to be picked up at the warehouse, have been introduced at various locations and will also be expanded. We remain focused on the continued growth of our Kirkland Signature brand through the development of new items, while also seeking to establish new relationships with premium brands. In fiscal 2019, this included the addition and/or expansion of quality offerings from Apple, Columbia Sportswear, Sony and Weber (among others). 

To complement and support our core warehouse business, we continue to improve our e-commerce activities. New merchandise selections have driven traffic to the site, and new technology has improved delivery times. Same-day grocery delivery is now available to members within a 20-minute drive of 99% of our U.S. locations. We continue to improve the Costco App for easier functionality, including new features such as the Digital Membership Card in the U.S. and Canada, Costco Pharmacy order placement and pick-up notifications, and an option to navigate directly to member savings events. Costco Travel introduced the option of bundling hotel accommodations with airfare, which provides added value and flexibility. In fiscal 2020, we are launching e-commerce operations in Australia and Japan. 

Our employees are fundamental to all of our achievements. We acknowledge their importance by providing great wages and health benefits, emphasizing inclusion and diversity, providing resources to enrich and inspire, supporting leadership training, and promoting from within. From entry-level employees to senior executives, we all have a responsibility for our success. I again extend my sincere thanks to all members and employees who help make Costco one of the world’s most highly regarded companies. May the year ahead bring you and your families good health, happiness, peace, and prosperity. 

Sincerely,

Craig Jelinek