# Costco Annual Letter 2006


**Dear Costco Shareholders, **

Fiscal 2006 was an outstanding year for our Company. Our sales during this 53-week fiscal year increased 13.7% over the prior fiscal year to nearly $59 billion, driven by an increase in comparable warehouse sales of 8% and the opening of 28 new warehouses (including 3 relocations). More importantly, earnings increased to a record $1.1 billion or $2.30 per share. These results came on top of a record year of sales and earnings in fiscal 2005.

Our members responded to our efforts and their satisfaction with Costco continued to improve. Key measures of this success, in addition to our strong comparable sales increase, are reflected in our high membership renewal rate of nearly 87%, our strong increase in new individual (Gold Star) and Business member sign-ups, a large increase in member upgrades to our Executive Membership, and our continuing top ranking in independent customer satisfaction surveys. 

Key elements to our success continue to be high sales volumes per warehouse, leveraging our efficient operating structure and making us the low cost operator in retail today. Costco sales volumes per warehouse continue to lead the industry and are two to three times those of our nearest club competitors. For the second time, one of our warehouses topped $300 million in sales in fiscal 2006. In addition, forty-two of our locations had sales of more than $200 million, compared with only 25 warehouses in fiscal 2005, and several others are not far behind. Our average sales per warehouse increased to $127 million. This top line sales success moved us from the ninth largest retailer in the world to the seventh largest in 2006.

Our continued emphasis on cost controls and expense reduction was effective in 2006, although we know there is still much work to do here. Our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses as a percent of sales declined from 9.76% in 2005 to 9.72% in 2006; and our shrink results continued to improve and were the lowest in the Company’s history at less than .20% of net sales.

Our Company reached several important milestones in fiscal 2006 and the first quarter of fiscal 2007. In July we celebrated the 30th anniversary of the opening of our first warehouse in 1976 in San Diego, California, which marked the beginning of the warehouse club industry, now a retail segment exceeding $100 billion annually. With the opening of our La Quinta, California warehouse just before Thanksgiving this year, we reached 500 warehouses in operation; and with four more openings just after Thanksgiving we now have 504 warehouses in operation around the world. In addition to being named one of the most-admired companies in the U.S. by Fortune magazine, this year we also were honored by our peers in being twice named Retailer of the Year—by both DSN Retailing Today and Mass Market Retailers. We also received the J.D. Power Award from National Vision Retailers for having the highest overall optical department customer satisfaction in the U.S.

With our strong bottom line performance and rapid inventory turnover we generated over $1.8 billion in cash flow in fiscal 2006. With these funds, and our beginning-of-year cash balance of over $2 billion, we were able to make some prudent expenditures in fiscal 2006: we paid out over $1.2 billion in capital expenditures, primarily for new warehouse and depot construction; we retired $300 million in long-term debt; we spent $1.5 billion to buy back 28.4 million shares of our stock; and we paid out more than $230 million in dividends to our shareholders, increasing our dividend by 13% from $.115 to $.13 per quarter.

This past year we began to implement more aggressive expansion plans, targeting both new and existing markets in the United States and internationally. After opening sixteen new warehouses and relocating five in fiscal 2005, we opened twenty-eight units in 2006, three of which were relocations to larger and better-located facilities. We have found that our stronger markets can support increasing numbers of our warehouses in closer proximity to each other. This infill strategy has been successful and drives our market share and increases our sales volumes in these communities.

In the U.S., our 2006 openings included infills in the following existing markets: San Luis Obispo, La Habra, SW Bakersfield and Lake Elsinore, California; Cave Creek, Chandler and SE Gilbert, Arizona; West Bountiful and Lehi, Utah; Centennial and Sparks, Nevada; Lacey, Washington; Hillsboro, Oregon; Nampa, Idaho; S. Austin and Duncanville, Texas; Buford, Georgia; and Pembroke Pines, Florida. We entered a new market in North Carolina, opening in the city of Wilmington; and we placed our fourth unit in Puerto Rico, in East Bayamon. We also relocated warehouses in Kalispell, Montana and Sequim, Washington to new, improved and larger facilities.

Our international expansion continues at a steady pace. We opened three new infill warehouses in Canada last year: Kanata, Ontario in the Ottawa suburbs; and Sherwood Park (Edmonton) and Northwest Calgary, Alberta. Our Gatineau, Quebec warehouse, just across the river from Ottawa, was relocated to a larger facility. We also entered two new markets in England: Sheffield in the north of the country and Milton Keynes in the southeast. In Mexico, we opened in Juarez, just across the border from El Paso, Texas, and in Veracruz on the Gulf coast.

Our ramped-up expansion plans for fiscal 2007 call for the opening of 36 to 40 new warehouses, including two relocations. Most of these will be in existing markets, and we are off to a running start. Prior to the end of calendar 2006 we opened units in Kauai, Hawaii; Gypsum, Colorado; Raleigh, North Carolina; Louisville, Kentucky; Maple Grove, Minnesota; W. Nashville, Tennessee; Helena, Montana; and Columbus, Ohio. Additional infill warehouses were opened in Marysville, Washington; Cumberland Mall, Georgia; Fontana, California; La Quinta, California; and Orland Park, Illinois. 

Internationally, we have opened four new warehouses so far in fiscal 2007, all in existing markets. In Canada, we opened a unit in downtown Vancouver, British Columbia, and in Boisbriand, Quebec, on the outskirts of Montreal. In Mexico, we opened a new building in Toluca, near Mexico City; and our early-December opening in Chester, England concluded our calendar 2006 openings. 

Our merchandise distribution infrastructure was enhanced in fiscal 2006, with the opening of large depot facility in Salt Lake City, Utah, that services Costco warehouses in the mountain states. Additionally, expansions were completed at our depots in Langley, British Columbia, St. Bruno, Quebec, and Mira Loma, California to achieve greater distribution efficiencies.

The number of Costco members continued to grow in fiscal 2006. With more than 47 million loyal cardholders, we continued our strong member renewal rate at nearly 87%. Our members know that they can always find the highest-quality products at the best value at Costco. But that is only part of what they love about our company. It is the thrill of the hunt (we call this our “treasure hunt”) that they come for – always aware that we will have something new, exciting and novel they might find in the next aisle – things like Prada handbags, Callaway golf clubs, or a $12,000 tree house. 

Our members know that Costco membership is worth more, and they are quite willing to pay for it. More and more members are taking advantage of the great benefits and services offered by our Executive Membership, at $100 a year, and enjoy the 2% reward (up to $500) they receive each year on their qualified purchases. We raised our membership fees for our Gold Star and Business Memberships by $5 in April (for member renewals in July). The incremental annualized income from this increase is $75 million, which we will realize over the next two years. Overall in fiscal 2006 we took in $1.1 billion in membership fees. These membership funds are always used to make Costco more competitive in the marketplace. 

The partnerships we have built with our suppliers are key to our ability to provide our members with the quality and value that they have come to expect from Costco. Our reputation for being tough negotiators is well earned; but at the same time our suppliers know that we will always treat them fairly and honestly. Together, we work hard to continually improve the quality of our merchandise while enhancing its value. In product sourcing, development and packaging we continue to be mindful of fair trade issues and the environment, and we are proud of the contributions that Costco makes in these important areas, such as our fair-trade coffee offerings and new emphasis on organic products. We continue to develop mutually-successful relationships with many of the world’s leading corporations, such as Colgate-Palmolive, ConAgra, Hewlett Packard, Jones of New York, Michelin, Nestle, Panasonic, Pepsi, Procter & Gamble, Sara Lee, Apple, Starbucks and Sony TV to name just a few.

In fiscal 2006 we sold more than 1.5 million TVs and $300 million of digital cameras. We filled 26.3 million prescriptions, sold two million pairs of eyeglasses, printed more than a billion photos, and served 63 million hot dog and soda combos (still only $1.50). We sold 500 million dollars-worth of seafood globally and 28 million rotisserie chickens in the U.S. and Canada alone. Eleven percent of the organic milk and forty percent of the Tuscan olive oil sold in the United States last year was bought at Costco. We also sold $805 million of wine, including $390 million in fine wines; and our members bought more than 96,000 karats of diamonds. No wonder we are now the second-largest general merchandise retailer in the U.S.

Costco’s Kirkland Signature private label products are recognized in all of our markets for their incomparable value and quality, and Kirkland Signature is becoming a respected name-brand in its own right. We currently carry 330 private label items, which account for 15% of our sales. Our plans are to increase the number of Kirkland Signature items, and we hope to drive Kirkland Signature sales to 25% of our total over the next several years. 

Augmenting the Company’s warehouse operations is our expanding E-commerce business, costco.com. As expected, our sales for 2006 increased 59% over 2005, and profits were up again. We project sales will be well over $1 billion in 2007 and hope to reach $5 billion in five years. Costco.com allows us to offer our customers high-end products that are not available in our warehouses, and warehouse shoppers can also order online from costco.com at kiosks in many of our buildings, as well as from their own computers. This year we expanded the online sporting goods and housewares categories and added a new business products program, as well as the ability to purchase “build-to-order” diamond rings. In its second year of operation in our important Canadian market, costco.ca had significant sales growth and was profitable. Like its U.S. counterpart, costco.ca’s top sellers include electronics and jewelry.

Costco’s ancillary businesses not only continue to bring our members in for more frequent shops, but they drive sales in every market where we do business and provide significant value and service to our members. Altogether, ancillary sales increased by more than 25% in 2006, to more than $8.3 billion. Our pharmacies continue to receive media acclaim as the lowest-priced providers by as much as 80% to 90% in every market, particularly for generic drugs; and the Company’s Kirkland Signature over-the-counter medications also provide unparalleled value. We are pleased to note that Costco pharmacies effectively transitioned our members to the challenging Medicare Part D program. With 429 pharmacies in operation, Costco’s pharmacy sales were up 16% last year. Our first Central Fill facility debuted in fiscal 2006, bringing new efficiencies to our prescription-fill process in our Northwest Region. This service is seamless to our members, with prescriptions filled and delivered in 24-hours or less to their local warehouse. 

It was another tumultuous year for the gasoline market, and we all felt the price crunch at the pumps; but Costco members knew they could find the lowest prices in town at one of our 249 gas stations. The first Costco Car Wash was added to our Seattle warehouse this past year in a test program that has proved popular with our Puget Sound members. Ecologically-friendly, the car wash system recovers 75% of the water used, and the service includes rim cleaning, waxing and undercoating, all for $7.99 plus tax. 

As Costco’s founders, we have always said that the Company’s employees are its most valuable assets. We believe our management team is one of the most cohesive and talented in the retail industry. We are proud that they possess the skills, experience, and abilities to fully operate Costco successfully for many years to come, and that an aggressive training program is in effect to mentor the Company’s future leaders. Many of our executives have been with us for more than twenty years, and some of them have worked together for nearly forty years in the retail industry. This year we added two new members to our Executive Committee: Ginnie Roeglin, Senior Vice President of E-Commerce and Publishing, and Louise Wendling, Senior Vice President and Country Manager of Canada. 

We have assembled an outstanding team of warehouse managers, each of whom is directed to make their highest priority the training and developing of new managers and leaders for the Company as we prepare for expanded growth. It is very important to us that all of Costco’s employees have equal opportunities for advancement and that our management teams reflect the diversity of the communities in which we do business. Our turnover rate is the lowest in the retail industry, and we are grateful to each of Costco’s 132,000 employees for their excellent work ethic, exceptional member service, and loyalty to the Company.

During the third fiscal quarter Costco initiated an internal review of its historical stock option grant practices to determine whether the stated grant dates of options were supported by the Company’s books and records. The review determined that, in several instances, it was impossible to determine with precision the appropriate measurement date for specific grants, but only a range of such dates. Our practices did not meet the high standards to which we as a company are dedicated and which we follow in every aspect of our business. For that, as well as the expense and distraction caused by the inquiry, the Company apologizes to its shareholders. As previously disclosed, the Company has recorded an adjustment to transfer $116.2 million from retained earnings to paid-in capital, representing previously unrecorded after-tax compensation expense, and to increase the deferred tax asset account by $31.5 million; and we have improved the controls concerning equity grants. We believe that our actions have put this issue behind the Company, both from a financial statement and a controls standpoint. 

The successes of fiscal 2006 highlighted above only strengthen our resolve to continue our relentless focus on our mission statement and code of ethics, which not only specify that we bring high quality goods and services to market at the lowest possible prices every day, but that we do so with integrity at every level of our company while valuing the interests of all of our stakeholders. It is this commitment that has always set Costco apart and that will spur us onward successfully in the future. We recognize that we have plenty of opportunities to improve every part of our business, and we assure you that we will stay focused on that task. 

On behalf of the entire Costco management team and all of our employees, we pledge to continue our constant quest to turn challenges into opportunities and seek constructive ways to improve our existing business while initiating new avenues for growth and success in the future. We are very positive and excited about Costco’s ever-expanding potential, and we look forward to discussing our plans for the future, as well as the Company’s fiscal 2006 results, with many of you at our upcoming Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 31, 2007 in Bellevue, Washington. 

We appreciate the confidence you have placed in Costco and our management team, and we thank you for your support as we prepare to enter the new year. We hope that 2007 will be a peaceful and successful year for you and your loved ones. Best wishes for a joyous Holiday Season. 

Warm Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Jim Sinegal