# Costco's International Growth Opportunity

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### I’ll start with Costco International margins. The international locations generate better margins than the US locations, which is very unusual. From what I could gather, some people have said to me, it’s lower wages or healthcare insurance costs which, apparently, makes a big difference. But I also guess those benefits will be offset by lower pricing internationally, versus the US. To me, it seems as if there is a missing element. Is it lower gas sales, potentially, because that is almost a loss leader? Would that make a difference in margins? In your experience, what makes the international profitability that much better?

I’ll touch on a couple of points you made and then I will get to what I think. You mentioned gas as a loss leader; actually, it’s not a loss leader. Costco usually dominates the market in gas pricing and their fuel is a proprietary mix that Costco has made for them. You can find this on many news stations and there have been studies that it cleans engines. When reading the financial reports, every period, you can show whether gas hurt or added to the bottom line for Costco. Because they refill the tanks so fast, they have to reset pricing as fast as the tanks get refilled so they are making the margin the company sets as something that cannot be exceeded.

> There are times when they would have it declining so fast in cost that their margin would be increased because keeping up with that is difficult, as they don’t run the tanks empty. Conversely, on the increase, the same thing applies; they would get hurt on margin. But they do not use gas as a loss leader. Every item in Costco, including every gallon of gas, stands on its own and is sold at its associated cost, with a margin cap that is established by the company and strongly adhered to.

Secondly, yes, the cost for insurance in some nations is significantly different or non-existent versus America, where Costco is known for supplying really robust full coverage insurance benefits to its employees. America is a capitalist country; it’s not a socialist country and, therefore, insurance is privatized. In some countries, where they do business, insurance is not privatized, such as Canada, for instance. It’s socialized and it’s paid for, by the employee, through their taxes, so Costco would not need to cover that expense.

As far as Costco paying lower wages in some countries, they set wages prevailing for the country, so they attract and maintain quality employees and they are known for paying superior wages in some countries, such as China. We all know that China is a very low-wage nation and Costco pays wages that are commensurate with the trade and executives. If they were to transfer any of those employees to another nation, even America, they would ensure that those employee’s wages were not shocking to the incoming or outgoing system.

> To get to why do they make more margin, if you were to see foot traffic in some nations, other than America, you would see that the income or the membership is significantly higher in some nations because the populous and the sheer volume of foot traffic going through those buildings is a multiple of what you see in the US nation. That enhances margin. It goes straight to the bottom line. Reading the financial reports, you can often see that the margin on the goods may yield the company, as a net, approximately 1%, after everything is paid. All of the membership revenue, added as profit to the company, they may make somewhere between 2.5% to 3.5% net margin, depending on all the economic conditions that spin out from the current landscape.

In other nations, having higher number of members paying a membership yields higher margins because that is margin money. Having low or no health benefits being a part of the compensation package adds to the margin. As far as higher margins on goods, Costco stamps out their methodology of how you go to market and exceeding margins in any category, regardless of whether you are the category captain and have absolute pricing authority, in any market retail sector landscape, is an absolute no-no. If an executive and their team got busted for doing that, that would be course corrected and the executive and their team would either be retrained or replaced. That is absolutely abhorrent in the Costco system.

Additionally, if you think about it, some nations only have one, two or three locations, which means their cost for logistics is significantly less. For instance, Iceland, China, France or Spain don’t have their own depot. They have goods either shipped direct to the warehouse or through a different depot system that is not impacting the overall cost of operation in those geographic areas.

### There’s not a distribution center inside, so everything gets shipped directly and, I guess, that’s a cost saving to the system?

Sure. While the depot system is a profit center, in most areas, it can also be a negative, depending on the prevailing rate of freight. You can’t adjust your costs up to the total system. For instance, in the US, when gasoline – including diesel – was so high, the depot didn’t raise their fees to the warehouse and the buying system, to cover those additional real freight costs. They just weathered it. You have ebbs and flows there, as well.

### I didn’t appreciate that the distribution centers themselves were also run as profit centers, charging the cost to the warehouses?

Yes; each item stands alone so every single item that passes through the depot gets assessed a fee and everything is charged the same fee, based on the table and its weight and cube. You put it in per item.

### In terms of international expansion, Iceland was a huge runaway success, as was the first opening in China. Usually, international expansion is difficult and that was one of the problems that Walmart, in their early days, ran into. Their key competitive advantages of buying on massive scale, didn’t carry internationally because people demanded different products internationally. What makes Costco’s international execution so successful and what drives the ability to execute well when coming to a new country and opening new locations, internationally?

China took over 20 years to open, working with the government, assessing the economic health landscape; all the things that go in with starting a business. They are not starting from scratch because they already have a template in the US and Canada that works well, that has been wear tested for over 40 years. There is a lot of competencies they can take into another nation when they are opening up a warehouse and starting a business.

One of the things they can’t take is working with the government. That is one reason why it took so long to open in China; when was going to be the right time? In China, it was so successful because the Chinese nation loves American goods so things made in the USA, or somewhere in North America – maybe made in Canada which would be maple syrup but not much else – people were very eager to shop at a Costco which they have heard is an American icon, at get American goods what they’ve heard are controlled prices, there was a huge flock to go there.

I’ll tell you a story that demonstrates Costco’s pricing authority and their cap on margin on goods. Costco opened with a tire shop, which they do with most warehouses and Iceland, in particular because, while it is a walking community inside the city, it is a giant island where people need a car to get from one place to the other; camping and being outdoors is a really big part of their community and lifestyle.

> They opened with a tire shop and when they came to town, to open the tire shop, their pricing on their tires was so shocking to the new members and then the members who were telling all their friends who weren’t members yet about their tire prices. There had a been a local tire shop owner that had a business, in Iceland – I believe it was in Reykjavik – for three generations and their pricing was, I believe, approximately fivefold of what Costco was selling their tires for. They didn’t even lower their pricing immediately. People were starting to ask them questions as to why they were pricing so high. They suddenly did a big news blitz and lowered their pricing to match Costco. When people asked if they were concerned about going out of business they said, no, we can afford to do this.

Then there was an uproar as people accused them of ripping them off. They said, we know your kids, we’ve known your family, we know your grandparents, you’ve been a part of our community for all these years and you have been taking advantage of our isolation and the fact that our families need to be safe on the roads. It’s only because a competitor came to town that you’ve decided to treat us right. That made not only Iceland national news but it made world news.

### I’ve read general stories about what a tremendous success it was. Iceland is a small nation and I think the percentage I read was that about 80% of the nation is a Costco member.

I just went there last year and the prices are expensive because they are so remote. That’s one reason why Costco is so successful in Alaska and was so successful when they opened there in 1985, because the cost of a gallon of milk was $5, as was a loaf of bread. Then Costco comes to town and the pricing is a fraction and people felt as if grocery stores had been robbing them because they were so isolated and there was nowhere else to go and these were staples in people’s homes.

That is Costco’s success story. They come in and their whole model is, you buy a membership to shop with us and we will honor your membership by never going above this margin, on these goods. We will bring you treasure hunt items where we still will not go above these margins, on those goods, that are exciting and you’ve got to get them now or they won’t be available. And our buyers will work very hard on being tough but fair with vendors to make sure they are carving out every red cent they can, in making the vendors’ system efficient, so we can continue to deliver you ever-increasing lower-cost goods.

Their objective is not to continue to increase margin by lowering the cost of goods. Their objective is to continuously lower the cost of goods, lowering the sell price, keeping the margin as the static and rewarding the member that trusts them with their membership dollars.

### That is the differentiating factor for Costco. On the one hand, I like these apocryphal stories of Iceland and China; I remember they had to shut down traffic, I was reading, because the demand for membership and to get into the store was so high. But what about other locations? I know France is a viciously nationalistic country and they don’t really like American things. They don’t like French fries. How does Costco succeed in places like that?

It’s been very hard. They opened in France around seven years ago. It has been very hard. It has been very tough to convince the consumer to come and buy at Costco. Also, another reason why is because, in France, people get their groceries daily and they cook daily, with fresh ingredients. If you buy at Costco, you’re buying in bulk which means you need to put it in storage and a lot of kitchens and houses don’t have a lot of storage. It’s very American behavior.

Costco has had to change some of the formats of their items, in tandem with educating the French consumer on why the larger packaging is important in yielding lower-cost goods. You’re right, the French perspective, overall, is that they think Americans are gluttonous and that everything is big, oversized and Americans are fat; we are total consumers and we don’t really care about anything else apart from our own creature comforts. That is something that Costco has had to try hard to not represent, to help the French population understand their intent on why they go to market the way they do.

### What about places like Italy?

The same thing. Not to the same degree, but all of the levers that I just lined out, same thing.

### What has Costco done, specifically, to try and address that? It sounds as if you mentioned that they have slightly shrunk the size? How do you overcome the storage issue? What else do you adjust to overcome the poor perception? Costco has many healthy foods and alternatives so what do you have to do to overcome this issue of, we’ll sell you food to make you fat?

I think you do as much as you can, through getting your marketers out into companies and do what you can do on site and educate and talk about the membership and why they do what they do and the value of the membership. Then you hope – because Costco banks on this – that you get positive word of mouth and build a reputation. They count on the value of time, in building a reputation.

### In the United States, Costco doesn’t really do that much marketing, that I remember, on TV?

They don’t do any TV marketing. They have news that picks up stories when they have extraordinary value or they do really extraordinary things for a community. When Katrina happened, they donated truckloads and truckloads of water to the National Guard, partnering with vendors on things like that. It is all about reputation.

They do mailings. In the US, they do on sites, as they do in all the other nations. They have marketing teams, in their membership, that go out and do on sites to explain the value of the membership. For example, say a company buys that as a perk for their employees. They might buy a company membership and have 100 or 200 cards and give that to the employees, annually, as part of their benefits package.

That’s interesting. I was thinking, in order to do on site education, you have to get people to actually come to the site. That is already something that probably requires more marketing than what Costco does, traditionally, in the US.

They do do that in the US; a cluster of warehouses will do that. Say, they go to Microsoft at lunchtime and they bring pizzas and cake and the employees come at will and they do a marketing blitz on site.

### This brings me, as an investor, trying to figure out what is the potential total addressable market, for Costco stores in the US. I had a few really old slides that I came across, probably made in the 1990s, where people were thinking that the number of Costco warehouses had peaked. They thought there was no more saturation that could come from that point. Here we are, in 2022, and they are opening stores in locations that Costco themselves, it seemed like, didn’t think they would open, in Walmart’s territory, and they have been very successful.

### Internationally, it has been a challenge for me to understand what those projections could look like. I know I’ve put some specific numbers together and you don’t have to comment on the specific numbers but, however you feel comfortable, if you could give me a big picture of how to think about it or how Costco thinks about it?

It’s not a linear equation, at all. There are common metrics that are looked at but there are uncommon metrics that are specific to a geographic region, which is a risk assessment. The only way to understand those is to understand the geopolitical and economic conditions of a nation or, within a nation, a specific geographic area. Additionally, for some context, when Jim and Jeff started Costco – I was born and raised in Costco under their leadership – they tell the story and the legacy is, they thought, when they started, if they had five to 10 warehouses in the Puget Sound area, that they were going to have an enormously successful company.

What happened, clearly, is more than that. What they have had to do is be open to learning continuously what is creating this success. Through understanding what is creating the success, which were some of the metrics we have been talking about, they also had to be open to understanding risk assessment. Going into China was a hugely risky proposition; it took 20 years. Could we go in and spend all this money and hire all these people, and then end up failing? With that, we have to build a relationship with this government because we have built our reputation over so many decades and this could be a governing body, should we fail in their nation, that they could disparage us publicly and we would have no recourse.

The risk assessment is different for every place they go. Understanding, as I said, geopolitical conditions and the favorability of American companies, is something that, if you are looking at investing in international growth as something that is of superior interest to you, and it will inform your investment level, either doing the digging yourself and disseminating the information as far as you can understand it and, potentially, pulling in others who have specific educations in those areas that could point out things that aren’t readily seen, would be of importance.

If you want to more fully understand all of that, bring in professors from universities that do study these areas and have studied these areas and can give you a peek under the tent and see what’s happening in things that are not published in the news, that you have to ferret out, that nobody could probably get to unless it was a place of specialized study.

Costco works with universities. They have very friendly relationships with a couple of universities. They support under-funded kids that have high promise, to get educations, not necessarily because they will come back to Costco but because they believe access to education is important. In addition, they also tap those universities and those systems for knowledge. They may say, we need to come in and have a think tank. That is what their board is for, too. Bring in resources; let’s talk about this. Each one of us is going to be assigned a task and let’s go and find out the information and bring it back so we can make an educated decision. Plus, they have a real estate scouting team that is on the payroll that does a lot of this. Everybody has their nation that they are looking at, to understand better and try to assess the risk, but there are always going to be unintended consequences.

That is why some of the growth is slow too. How much can we afford to lose, not just in fiscal damage but, also, in reputational damage? We’re not longer a small company where we are storming and norming. Our shareholders and our members expect us to figure this stuff out before we make super risky decisions.

### Can you walk me through an example? You’ve been with the company for 30 plus years. Let’s say, before the company went into France, how did that decision happen to go into France, to open X many locations in France? What needed to be done? Was the real estate from the US dropped off in France? Did they hire local people to build? How did that process take place.

The local real estate group goes to that nation and works with the developers, in that nation and consultants, in that nation, for business development and works with the government. Is the government going to be friendly? They have to have those conversations. They have to not only ask pointed questions, listen to the answers but also listen to what is being unsaid. These are not short processes.

### Before that happens, do Costco do a population density study?

Absolutely. Costco does education and income assessment. They will talk openly, especially to their shareholders about how they have the most highly educated and highest income members. They are frequently surprised, when they open a warehouse. They feel they have turned over every stone chopped it up 15 ways and there is not a way to get more granular. They open a warehouse and it far exceeds their success trajectory set out, because it draws from further – more mileage – than they expected. It’s cute, to a degree, that it’s still so innocent in some ways. They plan for success and even more success occurs. They never fully realize the magnitude and draw of their reputation and how many people want it, which I find endearing.

### They do income studies, level of education studies, population assessment?

Yes. Say, for instance, you have a less densely populated area that you think you are going to draw from, but the income is twice as much as a neighboring warehouse that has twice as many residents, with half the income. You are talking about, how many car parks are you going to need? What do you need your square footage to be? What is your truck volume for delivery of goods going to be? How many people are you going to have to hire to manage the volume of your members? How many memberships do you think you are actually going to sell? What is your per basket value going to be?

You then go into a less densely populated area, with higher income and higher education and you draw from all these outlying areas. Before you know it, you have twice the membership base you thought you were going to have; twice the foot traffic you thought you were going to have.

Here’s another thing that Costco does, and this is totally public information. When they identify a piece of land, in an area, often it is raw, and the road system is not strong enough to manage the pressure they are going to put on it because the volumes of traffic are going to increase. They work with the county, the city, the state, to get tax credits in return for investing in improved infrastructure of streets and byways and highways.

A lot of that work happens in tandem with building the warehouse or some of that work happens prior to building the warehouse because they need the infrastructure so they can get trucks in and out to do the building.

### What is the lead time from the time that Costco identifies a potential area, to the time a warehouse is actually opened, internationally? China, as a communist country, being perhaps an outlier. But for some of these other countries, such as Ireland, Brazil, Caribbean nations, Korea, which were also very successful, from what I’ve seen?

They’re going to tap a lot of the resources they already. For instance, they find a piece of property, they are working with the government, they are putting a cost schedule together, they are tapping the resources they already have. Some of the buildings come in pre-fab and then they just click them into place, but they also hire local contractors to lay the cement, to do the landscaping and the local road infrastructure improvement. Being able to get on those people’s schedules, for that magnitude of work, all of those things feed into a timeline. It just isn’t cookie cutter because you don’t know what you are dealing with.

You don’t know the pressures those industries are dealing with and you don’t even know if those industries exist or to what level they exist. Costco is sometimes known for flying people in and housing them for the entire build out of a warehouse, because they have competencies that they need that the community doesn’t really have. That is not all the time, always, but it’s not so unusual that it wouldn’t be an immediate consideration if they ran into a roadblock in any one of those areas needing build out.

They are definitely problem solvers. They make sure they have a really great network of resources because if they can’t find it locally, for all the things that are needed, then they just use resources that they have already employed. They will say, can we get some contractors out here for nine months? We will fly them back and forth every month, so they can see their family or fly their family in to see them, once every quarter. They just figure it out.

### Looking at the information that I put together, can you give me a sense if any of the country projections I have done – let’s take the middle point because that’s the base case – jump out as unrealistic or realistic, to the extent that you can comment on it. I don’t know how familiar you are with what, potentially, a TAM in Japan could be, for Costco.

In January, a report came out that where CFO Richard Galanti told analysts that Costco is looking to put on 25 net new units, including second warehouses, in each of China and France and a first location in New Zealand. They are going to do some relocations. This is up 25% over 2021, which did 20 stores; in 2022 they’re going to do 25 stores and they plan to relocate five locations. The net 25 is all new brick-and-mortar.

I know they are investing in their infrastructure for logistics, which is a big deal. That might be more depots, but I also know trucking is a problem. We all know, nationally, especially truckers are a hot commodity.

Going back to your question, you are looking at Canada of six. I don’t know about Canada growth, honestly. That was your bull; your bear is probably more where you have zero. China, total stores possible 810; they are putting one more. You are going from one to two stores, in China, and that’s public knowledge.

### I guess my question was, Walmart already has a ton of stores in China; the Sam’s Club concept, I should say. Is the idea for Costco to have 20 stores? It seems to be that they dipped their toe and got the logistics set up for the first one and the second one should be somewhat easier but the tenth one should be much easier?

This is true when you are talking about economies of scale; that bears out regardless of who you are. I also go back to risk assessment and risk of reputation. To be honest – this is going to sound disparaging and, quite frankly, I don’t care – Sam’s doesn’t have a good reputation wherever they do business, so they don’t really care about risk assessment for their reputation. They have not done things well, in China. It’s been public knowledge about some of the missteps they’ve made.

I believe that Costco is significantly more conservative because they want to stay on friendly terms with the Chinese residents and the Chinese government. They are not going to just break down the door and bowl their way in where they are not welcome. They are probably doing a very measured approach and, I bet, they are studying Sam’s and all the mistakes Sam’s made and they are making sure they close all those gaps for themselves. That is because part of their risk assessment is reputation.

Going back to your original question, I’m just reading your notes here. I think Japan is highly successful and they are fairly saturated. I’m not saying this is the case, because I don’t know, for Japan they may add warehouses to fill in next to or nearly next to existing warehouses. Those warehouses are so busy; they sometimes have to have the local police out, especially on weekends, to allow a certain number of people in and a number of people out. They need to build more buildings to spread the membership base over more brick-and-mortar.

I know this drives down all of the efficiencies of overhead because sales solve everything, but you have got to create relief, at some point, because you’re just no longer efficient; it’s just too hard. For Japan, I can see that being the strategy where, I see here, you’re talking about competing formats and the political and legal climate. I don’t know about that. I would have to defer and do more studying to find that out.

Richard Galanti did not say where the relocations were but if they didn’t infill in Japan, I would suggest they may build bigger buildings and relocate, if they don’t build two buildings to cannibalize. They do this on purpose, to cannibalize off the building that has unmanageable sales volume.

I don’t know about Brazil, but I do know that – which you don’t have on here – for additional countries, they are going into New Zealand and that has been made public.

I don’t know about Brazil. I would say Brazil, for government, would be very hard. You have Latin America, excluding Brazil, but you also have Brazil here as your base case, just with slower building, given other competing formats. I think they are looking at it but I just don’t know. You have zero on here for another Iceland location and I definitely see them putting another Iceland location in, not that I have any behind the curtain knowledge. I’m just suggesting strongly that that would make sense to me.

I would agree with your thoughts about Australia. I would agree with your bull addition of one location in Taiwan. I don’t know about three locations in Korea but I definitely see additions in Korea. Like I said about Japan, I can see that rationale.

In terms of the UK, I think there is concentration on opening new nations, such as New Zealand, and organizing and coordinating some existing nations, such as Japan. In the US, definitely, there is always growth and, yes, they’ve courageously stepped into Walmart Sam’s area and they have had success. It’s funny, because you are holding your breath and chewing your nails and you go in, and it’s successful, so you think you can do more because you are emboldened. I definitely see more growth in the South. With the resurgence in the Midwest, after the failure of the car industry and now there is regrowth and a lot of repopulation, I see more growth happening there because there were some buildings shut during that time, so there would be reopening there.

I would say, all in all, I would actually find a mean point between your bear and your bull. Brazil and Latin America, are you talking about Costa Rica and places like that?

### Yes, everything else, from Peru to Chile to Argentina. To everything except Brazil. I broke out Brazil because it’s a very populous country on its own and a lot of other Latin American countries have a much smaller population. There’s no specific grand reason; it just made sense to break it out that way. It’s just all the other countries, except for Mexico, obviously.

You are saying over 25 years. I would say, if they go into Brazil, the Caribbean, which I see is zero or one for you, or Latin America at all, I would say it would be the latter part of 25 years. There is a lot of unrest in these areas. Although they are in Mexico and there is a lot of unrest there too, especially as of late, even in the very Americanized areas.

### That’s very fair and very helpful. There was an interview I read, not too long ago, and the gentleman was alluding to the idea that Costco may be straying away from its core philosophy. He was pointing to things like the fact they haven’t quite raised prices on their famous hot dog combo, but they have raised prices on bottled water packages that were always one of the staples that drew people in. Apparently, there are some fluctuations around that Kirkland margin where buyers were allowed to go slightly higher.

### That begs the question as to whether Costco is straying from its core philosophy that made it so successful, and the flywheel that created so much value for everyone, for the whole ecosystem? Do you find that to be the case or do you think that the old guard retired and the new guard coming in, they had these hires from outside, which was unusual for a company that always hired from within. What is your take on these latest developments? Do you still think that the culture is embedded and, even with the new guard, is going to stay the same Costco or do you think there is a possibility of this straying away?

The answer is not a resounding yes or no. The core principles of the company in how they go to market, ensuring that they have absolute pricing authority, that they are selling the highest quality goods, at the best possible price, still remains a core driving factor. What those mean may be being reshaped. Let me articulate that.

> With a margin cap on branded goods, of 14%, which is public knowledge, and with the margin cap of 15% on Kirkland Signature, which is public knowledge, and each item, in every single region, standing on its own was always a core principle. Now, amalgamating an average margin, across the nation, based on distance from manufacturing and landed cost, if one region were to push, say, to 17% but another region were to be depressed at 10%, the region at 17% would not be allowed to go over the 14%. However, if you decided that you wanted to amalgamate a margin based on an average, with volumetric guidance, and say your 17% margin was only 25% of the 100% and your 10% margin was 75% of your 100%, then you would have a blended average margin of approximately 12%. You’re at an amalgamated average of 12% so you are good.

> Everybody set their prices to be the same 9.99 across the entire region, across all regions and all warehouses, so when our member travels, they know that item is 9.99. We just know that it is a blended, weighted average, at 12%, where some warehouses are 17% and some warehouses are 10%. That is a departure. But there is a convincing argument that you are doing the member a service by giving them those goods at the same price wherever they shop and you are not really breaking the rules; you are just redefining the rules because, now, you have a blended, weighted average. It used to be that every item, in every warehouse, stood on its own and these were the parameters you priced at.

### What is your personal take on this? You grew up steeped in the old guard mentality. Do you think boosts the case for Costco or do you think it’s, somehow, the slippery slope?

The latter of the two. Let me tell you why. It becomes confusing. What’s the driving force for the buyers to ferret out and always dig and continuously work with the vendor system, on creating efficiencies to be digging out pennies, to get to a lowest possible cost, to enable the lowest possible sale price and be responsible for your margin? On your desk, that is your responsibility because you get paid on that and buyers make bonuses.

What if a buyer is closer in proximity to some of the highest volume manufacturing sites and gets the benefit of a 15% or 17% margin and somebody in an outlying region, that is further away from those manufacturing sites, gets the detriment of an 8% or 10% margin but the total company, and the shareholder, gets the return? It used to be that the tenets of the company were that you take care of your employees, you respect your vendors and, ultimately, you reward your shareholders. I believe there is an inversion in that. I don’t believe it is absolutely flipped, but I can see an eclipse of those lines happening.

Rewarding the shareholder is something that Jim, of course, always wanted to do, but not at the cost of swerving away from the original tenets, which were the foundation and pillars of the company, that the company sat on. The company is getting bigger and bigger and bigger and if you compromise the strength of those pillars and that foundation, who is going to hold it up? That is my personal opinion.