# Costco Annual Letter 2007


**Dear Costco Shareholders**,

As we begin our 25th year of operations, we look back at fiscal 2007 as another banner year for our Company, proving once again that our unique approach to merchandising and efficient operations continue to drive successful results. We finished the fiscal year with record sales and earnings per share. Sales for the 52 weeks were $63.1 billion, a 7% increase over the 53-week 2006 fiscal year; and comparable sales in warehouses open a year or more were up 6%. Net income again exceeded $1 billion, and earnings per share increased 3%, reaching a record $2.37, despite non-recurring charges that negatively impacted EPS by $.26. 

Our expansion efforts continued in fiscal 2007, as we opened 31 new warehouses (25 in the U.S. and six internationally) compared with 25 new locations in 2006; and we ended the fiscal year with 518 warehouses in 39 U.S. states and eight countries. Our average sales per warehouse increased to $130 million, nearly two-to-three times that of our competition. More than 45 of our warehouses generated sales exceeding $200 million, with several others not far behind. Two warehouses had sales of more than $300 million, and we expect that figure to continue to grow in the upcoming years.

Costco’s sales levels are the result, we believe, of well-executed merchandising, a focus on low-cost operations, and fiercely loyal membership and employee bases. People love to shop at Costco, where they know they can get unparalleled quality and value. Our members enjoy the treasure hunt atmosphere, with its enticing mix of practical items and indulgences; and they like to shop often to ensure they don’t miss out on exciting products like fine crystal, famous name-brand handbags, the latest in consumer electronics, and fine wines that are often sold out in a matter of days. This past year we also enjoyed the highest membership renewal rate in our history at 87%, attesting, we believe, to the high level of satisfaction our members have in our products and services.

Financially, Costco has a healthy balance sheet and strong cash flow. In fiscal 2007, we continued many of the initiatives begun in fiscal 2005. Since June 2005, we have repurchased nearly 15% of the outstanding shares of Costco common stock, enhancing our earnings per share performance along the way. The Company spent almost $1.9 billion between June 2005 and the end of fiscal 2006 to purchase 37.6 million shares; and an additional $2 billion was expended in fiscal 2007 to purchase 36.4 million shares. Costco also paid shareholders nearly $250 million in dividends in fiscal 2007, increasing its quarterly dividend by 12% – from $.13 per share to $.145 per share. In FY 2007, capital expenditures totaled $1.4 billion – for new warehouses, remodels and expanding our “cross-dock” depot facilities. To assist in the funding of these activities into fiscal 2008 and beyond, we also successfully completed a $2 billion debt offering this past February, at favorable interest rates.

Many of the new U.S. warehouses the Company opened in fiscal 2007, and in fiscal 2008 to-date, were infill buildings, designed to increase our market share in a number of existing markets, including: Seattle, Washington; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Nashville, Tennessee; Atlanta, Georgia; greater Los Angeles, Palm Springs and San Jose, California; Chicago, Illinois; Denver, Colorado; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Palm Beach, Florida; Raleigh/Durham, North Carolina; Washington D.C./Virginia; and Salt Lake City, Utah. We also entered nine new U.S. markets during fiscal 2007: in Kauai, Hawaii; Gypsum (near Vail), Colorado; Toledo and Columbus, Ohio; Louisville, Kentucky; Helena, Montana; Spartanburg and Greenville, South Carolina; and Grafton (Milwaukee), Wisconsin. 

Expansion plans for all of fiscal 2008 include the opening of more than 35 new warehouses. Fifteen of those, including four relocations, were operating in time for the important 2007 holiday season. Relocated to larger buildings at better locations were Chico, Victorville and Visalia, California and Union Gap, Washington. We also entered two new U.S. markets in the fall of 2007 – Montgomery, Alabama, and Omaha, Nebraska. In addition, four new U.S. infill buildings were opened: in San Antonio, Texas; Gig Harbor, Washington; Columbia, Maryland; and Albuquerque, New Mexico.


In fact, the Costco concept has translated well around the world, and we continue our successful international expansion. In fiscal 2007, we opened three warehouses in Canada: one each in the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver markets. In Mexico, we opened the Toluca warehouse in the greater Mexico City market; and in the U.K. we entered the Chester, England market, which is on the border with Wales. In Japan we opened our first warehouse in the city of Kawasaki, part of the greater TokyoYokohama metroplex. In addition, since the beginning of the new fiscal year, we have opened five new warehouses outside the U.S.: one in Taichung, Taiwan and four in Canada – in Candiac, Quebec; Richmond Hill, Ontario; Winnipeg, Manitoba; and Medicine Hat, Alberta. Overall, as of this writing, we are operating 529 warehouses around the globe. 

Key to our operating efficiencies are our state-of-the-art merchandise distribution facilities. Costco’s “depots”, handling over 80% of our product through-put and occupying more than 6.5 million square feet of space, provide us with an important competitive operating advantage. In fiscal 2007, we enlarged and improved two of our Canadian depot facilities – St. Bruno, Quebec and Brampton, Ontario – in order to more efficiently serve our Canadian warehouses. In fiscal 2008, we plan to spend nearly $150 million upgrading and expanding several other depot operations. 

Costco’s membership base rose from 48 million cardholders at fiscal year-end 2006 to over 50 million cardholders at this fiscal year-end. Many of these additions are Executive Members, who pay $100 per year to take advantage of additional benefits and services, as well as reap a 2% annual reward (up to $500) on their qualified purchases at Costco. Overall, we collected $1.4 billion in cash membership fees in fiscal 2007. 

Taking good care of our members is a business imperative at Costco; and we believe it is critical that we make good on the implicit promise of quality and value that Costco shoppers have come to expect. This commitment starts with our Mission Statement: “To provide our members with the highest quality goods and services at the lowest possible prices;” and we pursue this mission with a passion every day, by partnering with many of the most respected companies in the world to provide our members with a wide range of top quality merchandise. To ensure an ever-changing array of exciting, high-quality products, we constantly seek new partnerships and “best of” global suppliers. This past year we are pleased to have established direct relationships with many outstanding new suppliers, such as NordicTrack, Electrolux, Callaway, Keurig Coffee Makers, Capresso, Pallina and Helen Welsh handbags, and Hallmark. 

There are many elements that go into making high-quality products, and safety is certainly one of them. We work tirelessly with our suppliers on many levels to ensure the kind of high-quality products that Costco is committed to providing its members. This includes tight scrutiny of products made outside the United States, particularly in light of recent incidents involving toys, certain health and beauty aids and other items. And we are not satisfied with high quality and safety alone. We make a concerted effort to consider the environmental impact and fair trade issues, among other considerations, in the growth, manufacture and packaging of the products we sell. For example, a new line of Kirkland Signature origin-specific, fair-trade coffee is grown with sustainable agricultural practices, while providing higher prices to the “source” farmers.

Fiscal 2007 marked the 20th anniversary of introducing fresh foods departments into our warehouse format. These signature departments are now world famous for their variety, quality and value, and regularly bring our members in for additional shops. Fresh food sales have grown from $10 million in fiscal 1987 to more than $7.6 billion in fiscal 2007. Today, we are the No. 1 user of U.S. choice beef throughout the world. Last year, Costco sold more than 100 million pounds of ground beef and 40 million rotisserie chickens; and our fresh bakery produced more than 150 million croissants in fiscal 2007. In the U.S., during Thanksgiving week alone, Costco sold more than one million pumpkin pies. In our produce department, Costco members purchased more than 100 million pounds of grapes and over $100 million in fresh blueberries. And, lest we forget, in fiscal 2007 Costco members purchased a record 78 million hot dog and soda combinations at $1.50 each, a price held constant since 1985. 

As with all our products, we are constantly striving to enhance our offerings and stay on top of national trends, such as organic products, which are one of the fastest-growing categories in the food business. We are expanding our sales of hothouse-grown fruits and vegetables, many of which are grown in a clean, pesticide-free environment; and under the Kirkland Signature banner, we see many opportunities to increase our organic product offerings. Current Kirkland Signature organic offerings include cereal, butter, peanut butter and olive oil, to mention just a few. And just last month, we began to offer the first of several planned new items co-branded with Martha Stewart and prepared according to our joint specifications. 

Costco’s consumer electronics department, which includes computers and peripherals, as well as televisions and other high-tech items, is our top-selling nonfoods department, with sales of more than $4 billion in fiscal 2007. The highly technical aspects of these products do present significant challenges which we have addressed with our new extended warranty policy and a unique concierge service. The combination of these two programs has resulted in a positive member experience, while greatly reducing the costs associated with the return and disposition of electronics products.

Our ancillary businesses, which include gas stations, pharmacy, optical, one-hour photo and food courts, increased sales by more than 9% in fiscal 2007 to nearly $9 billion. Despite the continued turbulence in the gasoline market, we sold more than $4.6 billion in gasoline and increased our profits along the way. Our optical departments, with profits up 19%, are the No. 1 ranked optical retailer in the country and won the prestigious J.D. Power Award for the highest overall customer satisfaction in both 2005 and 2006. Our pharmacies again showed strong sales and profit increases; and Costco continues to be lauded by the media for its low drug prices and consumer-friendly approach to this business.

No discussion of Costco’s success would be complete without talking about E-commerce. Both our U.S. web site, costco.com, and our Canada site, costco.ca, realized strong growth with increased sales and profits this past fiscal year. Fiscal 2007 marked the first year that our E-commerce business reached $1 billion in sales, and we finished the year at nearly $1.2 billion, nearly $100 million of which came from Canada sales. E-shoppers love our mix of products and “wow” items, like our ultimate Super Bowl package that sold for $10,999 and included two tickets to the game, airfare and first class accommodations for three nights. We also added a national business supplies program that greatly expands our product offerings in six major categories. We expect this program to save our members time and money while helping Costco capture a portion of the multi-billion dollar online office supply business. Another way we are servicing our business members is through our Business Centers, which carry a product selection tailored specifically for food service, convenience stores and offices, and offer both walk-in shopping and deliveries. 

We recognize our success requires that we be a responsible neighbor in all the communities where we do business. This has always been important to our Company, and we continue to expand that dedication by constantly looking for ways to be good stewards of the environment we all share. For years we have participated in an extensive recycling program that includes cardboard and paper, plastic stretch wrap, tires, automotive batteries, photo lab silver, batteries, light bulbs and broken pallets. Warehouse skylights help us reduce our energy consumption, and are but one of the many energy conservation initiatives we are pursuing. We have six warehouses with solar panels in operation in California and Hawaii, and seven additional units are approved for the new fiscal year. 

After SG&A expenses as a percent of sales declined for the third year in a row, from 9.76% in 2004 to 9.72% in 2006, these expenses increased as a percent of sales in fiscal 2007. We want you to know that we are never satisfied with our expense results, and always feel we can and should do better. You have our promise we will stay on task to improve in this area. 

Overall, we are extremely proud of Costco’s accomplishments in fiscal 2007. We are now the fourth largest retailer in the U.S. and the eighth largest in the world; and more important, we are the undisputed sales leader and pricing authority in our industry, with the most innovative, consistent and cohesive management team.

Many of our executives have been with us for more than 20 years, and some have spent as many as 40 years working together in the retail industry. We have many more talented, highly-qualified managers who are being groomed to step into key leadership roles as needed, and hundreds more are being aggressively trained for advancement. We have always been successful in giving all of our employees equal opportunities to advance and in developing our leaders and promoting from within. In fact, 68% of our current warehouse managers started with our Company as hourly employees.

As Costco’s founders, we are proud to have assembled such an outstanding management team, and we have every confidence that our future leaders are now stocking shelves and pushing carts in our warehouses as they learn the business from the ground up, mentored by some of the best in the business. We extend our thanks to each and every one of Costco’s 136,000 employees for their hard work and dedication to our Company, and we look forward to what we will accomplish together in the years ahead. 

Our current thinking is that Costco has tremendous additional growth opportunities going forward and, if we continue to perform well, we might be able to double the size of our Company over the next decade. Of course, there are no guarantees, as long-term success will require many factors, including a sound economy; ongoing merchandising innovation; a disciplined approach to controlling expenses; developing the people necessary to successfully carry out such expansion; and a passion to make Costco the very best it can be. We believe that this is not only possible, but also represents the “core motivation” and passion of every Costco employee. 

Lastly, we continually receive comments on the amount of “publicity” Costco receives … whether it’s a recent write-up in the Sunday New York Times; or a local news reporter commenting on Costco’s pharmacy or gas prices being the lowest in town; or a late-night television host poking good-natured fun at Costco; or celebrities sharing how much they love shopping at Costco. Yes, we enjoy the many positive reports and accolades we receive. More importantly, we recognize the positive value it brings to our Company, particularly given that none of these items are solicited by us. Costco has no public relations department! On behalf of Costco’s management team and employees around the globe, we thank you for your ongoing trust and support. We value your partnership and hope to see many of you at our upcoming Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 29, 2008, in Bellevue, Washington. 

Best wishes for a joyful holiday season and a new year filled with exciting opportunities. 

Warm Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Jim Sinegal


