# Costco Annual Letter 2002
December 6, 2002

**Dear Costco Shareholder:**

 Despite a fiscal year that began with the tragedy of September 11th, and an overall continued economic weakness with declining consumer confidence throughout, Costco was able to achieve record sales and earnings in fiscal 2002, the 52 weeks ended September 1, 2002. We are proud of the immediate and selfless actions taken by literally thousands of Costco employees—both in and around New York City and Washington, D.C., as well as throughout our company—to help in any way they could on that most tragic day and during the many weeks that followed. We are also proud of how these same employees pulled together throughout the fiscal year, enabling Costco to achieve record results.
 
 During fiscal 2002, sales totaled USD 38 billion, an 11% increase over the prior year; and net income reached USD 700 million, 16% higher than earnings in fiscal 2001. Fiscal 2002 also witnessed continued expansion of our operations, with 29 new warehouse openings in both new and existing markets. For the second year in a row, total capital expenditures exceeded USD 1 billion. Included in these expenditures were over USD 150 million related to renovations and upgrades at existing locations and the replacement of several Costco warehouses to completely new locations. Despite overall economic turmoil, and senior management changes at several major retail competitors, we believe Costco ended fiscal 2002 in its strongest position ever— poised to continue its growth in sales and earnings, as well as to strengthen its position as one of the premier retail companies in operation today. One of the major hallmarks of our business is the extraordinary sales volume of our businesses, which generate over USD 103 million in sales per unit worldwide ($114 million in U.S. Costco locations). To our knowledge this is the highest sales performance of any retailer of significant size in the world. In addition, our comparable sales increase of 6% for the fiscal year, in units open more than one year, was among the best performances in the retail industry.
 
 As will be described in further detail below, Costco leveraged an 11% increase in sales to achieve a 16% increase in earnings. This was accomplished by stronger year-over-year gross margins and membership fee percentages, which together more than offset increased expense levels. While we would expect to continue to see slight improvement in our combined gross margin and membership fee ratios in fiscal 2003 and beyond, we must be ever mindful that our competitive position in the retail marketplace not be eroded. Be assured that it will not! We will continue to be the low cost provider of merchandise and services in every market where we do business.
 
 With regard to expenses, we constantly view expense control as both our greatest challenge and our greatest opportunity in growing earnings in the coming years. Over the past two fiscal years, our expenses as a percent of sales have grown from 8.71% in fiscal 2000 to 9.41% in the year just ended. While this 70 basis point increase in expenses over the past two years reflects our conscious decision to dramatically ramp-up our expansion efforts (61 new openings, including 45 “new market” openings), it also reflects rising energy, healthcare and bank merchant costs. We realize we must be industrious and creative in our efforts to drive down our expense ratios. To this end, our planned opening schedule of approximately 30 new warehouses in fiscal 2003 will be geared more towards opening “existing market” units than “new market” units, where higher first year sales levels should help to better leverage expense levels at these locations. With regard to rising healthcare costs, education and training on employee health and safety issues continue, underlining our goal of reducing costs while maintaining what we believe to be the most comprehensive healthcare benefits among major retailers. We continue to analyze our expense structure in depth, challenging expenses at every level throughout our company and bringing these cost savings to the bottom line…hopefully by fiscal year-end 2003.
 
 As mentioned earlier, in fiscal 2002 we continued our expansion focus into new markets. In fact, nearly two thirds of the 29 new locations in fiscal 2002 represented “new market” openings. We added three more warehouses in Texas to the seven we opened there the prior year. Several new units were also opened in the Midwest, strengthening our position in that region. These included openings in Michigan, Missouri, Minnesota, Indiana, Kansas and Illinois. New market openings also included two in Puerto Rico and two in the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania area. Openings in existing markets included new warehouses in California, Oregon, Nevada, Colorado, New York, North Carolina, Maryland, Virginia, and a new Business Center in Arizona, as well as three additional openings in England. Our relocations in fiscal 2002 of six long-established warehouses were highly successful, with each of these larger, better-located warehouses continuing to experience strong double-digit sales increases over their previous sales volumes. Four relocations were completed in California, as well as one each in New Jersey and Hawaii.
 
 We believe that despite the current economic turbulence, there continue to be good opportunities to expand our operations and increase market share in fiscal 2003, especially in existing markets where we are well-known and well-established. Of the approximately 30 projected openings in fiscal 2003, we will have opened 19 of these prior to calendar year-end, including our third unit in Japan, four new locations in California, and additional locations in Indiana (2), Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, Arizona, Massachusetts, and the United Kingdom, Canada and Mexico. In addition, in early December we opened a new warehouse concept in Kirkland, Washington that we call “Costco Home,” featuring high-end furniture and accessories in a 100,000 square foot renovated warehouse building. We believe this furniture format has great potential in its own right, but may also provide us with a number of furniture and accessory items that can be carried in our 400-plus regular warehouses and greatly enhance our current furniture department. Sales results on the opening four-day weekend far exceeded our expectations.
 
 On the merchandising front we continued to expand our ancillary departments, opening pharmacies, food courts, mini-labs, optical dispensing, hearing aid and gas stations with almost all of our new warehouse openings, as well as adding a number of these operations to existing warehouses where space and regulatory restrictions permitted. Sales at our e-commerce business increased over 80% in fiscal 2002, and was solidly profitable on a fully expense-allocated basis. We are encouraged about this business and the many special and unique products we offer our members, with little investment in inventory. Likewise, our in-warehouse special order kiosks allow our members to view samples of upscale merchandise in several categories—such as chairs and sofas, window coverings, high-performance automobile tires, and high-end plumbing fixtures—and place their orders while shopping at Costco. This business excites us because it provides us the opportunity to provide hundreds of additional products with little investment in sales space, labor or inventory. 
 
 During the past fiscal year we added nearly two million Gold Star (individual) and Business Members—making nearly twenty million members worldwide. While a considerable percentage of our member increase is attributable to new warehouse openings, we are pleased to report that membership renewals continued at our historically high rate of 86%. Also of note is the increase in the number of Executive Members—now numbering over 1.75 million—who pay USD 100 a year for access to a wide variety of member services, as well as earn a 2% reward ($500 maximum reward per year) on their qualified purchases. In addition to the initial member services offered to our Executive Members—telephone service, auto buying, check processing, auto and home insurance, credit card processing, real estate and mortgage services and payroll processing—we have added, or are testing in selected markets, healthcare insurance, financial planning, sharebuilding services, retirement planning, computer training and roadside assistance—all at the highest quality and competitive pricing. We are continually evaluating additional member services that would add further value to our growing Executive Membership base.
 
 We are committed to doing the best possible job for our members, employees, supplier partners, and shareholders—all in the context of strict adherence to the laws of the communities and countries in which we operate. We take these responsibilities very seriously. In terms of corporate governance, all of our management personnel have participated in ethics and leadership training, and are continually reminded of our uncompromising standards of honesty and integrity. We also want to share with you that corporate citizenship is high on our list of priorities. Costco is committed to diversity in the workplace; and our employees are involved in many positive ways in the communities we serve. We believe that successful companies give back to their communities, and we continue to expand our corporate-giving focus throughout our company. In addition to strong, on-going programs with Children's Hospitals and United Way Chapters around North America, Costco, working with community leaders, has established college scholarship programs for disadvantaged youth in several communities. Also, Costco employees in many communities have been trained to effectively teach reading to struggling elementary school children, and work with them on a weekly basis. We are very proud of the voluntary efforts of all our fellow associates. These are but a few of our many involvements in corporate citizenship. 
 
 Lastly, it is with much sorrow that we inform you of the recent death of Fred Paulsell, Jr., an initial investor in Costco in the early 1980’s, a founding Costco board member and close friend to many of us at Costco. We will greatly miss the insights and counsel that Fred contributed to the success of Costco over these past twenty years. It is a great loss to our Company. As always, we want to thank all of our fellow employees—now numbering over 100,000 and operating over 400 warehouses and providing support functions worldwide—for their hard work, dedication and discipline during these challenging times. We also thank you, our shareholders, for your on-going support. We believe Costco made strong progress in fiscal 2002—achieving record sales and profits, expanding our operations in both new and in-fill markets, strengthening our balance sheet and positioning Costco for further long-term growth, profitability and increased shareholder value in the years to come. We look forward to seeing many of you at our Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 30, 2003 in Bellevue, Washington. Best wishes for a happy, healthy and peaceful Holiday Season and New Year. 
 
 Cordially,
 
 Jeff Brotman 
 Jim Sinegal