# [[Costco]]: APAC & China Store Growth Potential

#InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Costco international locations seem to get much better margins than in the US, which is unusual for retail businesses. Some experts I've spoken with said it's due to lower healthcare costs, and some said it's because of lower wages, but presumably, that's somewhat offset by lower prices in international locations. Somebody mentioned it could be gas, but my understanding is that all products at Costco are under or into the same margin, except for Kirkland, so why would gas have lower margins than anything else? If you could shed some light on it, that would be helpful.

Certainly, labor has always been a factor in almost all of the Asian markets, with the exception of Japan. Japan's labor cost is very similar to the US, but in all the other markets, it's lower. Also healthcare costs, all those countries have national healthcare. Companies in some countries are required to contribute a certain amount, but it's nowhere near what we are required to do in the US, what Costco does in the US voluntarily. That's a significant factor.

Also, one of the issues is that Costco has a range, set up by Jim Sinegal from the beginning, that your selling price is between 10% to 14% margin. In many competitive US markets, more products are closer to the 10% margin, maybe 11% or 12%. In Asia, because there isn't much competition for Costco or any club operation, they can run a margin closer to 14%. So staying within the parameters of the company rules and guidelines but on the high end makes it better. The other thing is that the sales volume per location is higher than in the US, and the higher volume of sales gives them a better operating cost; you can spread it out over more. It's a factor of four or five items.

### Just to close this question on gasoline, some have led me to believe that in France or maybe in some Asian countries, there are fewer automobiles and gas is not sold at retail locations for Costco, and I guess there are different rules for that. Is gas a contributor, and is it underwritten to the same margin as the rest of the business?

There's very little gas involved in the Asia clubs, and I think there are a few test areas where they're trying it. Gas is volatile and has affected Costco's performance, sometimes when you have sharp price increases or decreases. They don't have much gas in those locations, so you don't get that volatility and take the hits when the market shifts.

### In the US, if you look at the overall employee cost, salary plus benefits, let's say it's 100%. What percentage of that is healthcare benefits? Is healthcare about a third of what Costco pays all-in per employee?

> It runs between 40% and 30% depending on certain areas, but yes, it is about a third of their cost, and it's a big hit. It's a huge hit. In Asia, we didn't have to deal with it that much. In each country, there's a cost for national healthcare. In some countries like Taiwan and Japan, the company pays a third of that cost, but that cost is fractional compared to the US. The US has a huge hit, and it's not a big hit against the company in Asia. In China, there isn't any hit; the Chinese government provides everything.

### Let's talk about the international expansion itself. It's usually difficult. There was a case study on Walmart's international expansion and its difficulties. At that time, 30, 20 years ago, the takeaway was that the core competencies didn't translate internationally because they didn't have the same scale. Costco's international expansion has been a runaway success in some countries like China, Iceland, and Korea. Perhaps less successful in some other locations, and we'll get to those, but what drives their ability to execute so well internationally? It's the execution element I want to probe right now.

> It's easy to answer that. I opened Korea in 1994, and Walmart came in about the same time, and I thought, wow, they're going to be very successful here, and they're going to knock these guys around, and they didn't. Over the years, I’ve watched this phenomenon constantly and dealt with it in China because I worked with Walmart there. Walmart opens with a team of expats; they get the program up and going, and then, to reduce costs, they throw many of the expats out and use local teams to run the business. All of a sudden, your Walmart starts looking like any hypermarket in China because that's what the local guys know. That's what happened in Korea. They ended up being nothing special. They weren't different. They did the same thing in China, and I've seen a lot of companies do that.

Carrefour was the most successful international retailer in the 80s and 90s; they were fabulous. They changed leadership and their approach and suffered horribly for the same reasons. Costco has been remarkably consistent. Extremely consistent. When they go into a new market, they're very conservative. Jim Sinegal used to tell us that when I walk into a club – I don't care where in Asia – once I'm inside, I want to feel like I'm in Seattle. We don’t change the way we look. We don’t change the way we operate. We don’t bend to that because our format is successful, and we must keep it.

Sinegal drove that principle, which made it the right decision and successful. We didn't give in. We held to it, which made it more successful than the others. We made a difference, showed a difference, and offered products they couldn't get at other locations. We didn't blend in. We stayed unique.

### What people consume in China is vastly different from what one might buy at a Costco in New Jersey; there's a need for different products. How do you square this consistent look with a need for different stuff? We don't eat as much kimchi in the US as folks do in Korea. But we can always get the best price on Adidas sneakers, branded, at any location?

> Their local products run at about 40% to 50% of their offering, and they only sell local products where they can make a difference. If they're going to be the same products as everybody else and can't bring value, they don't tend to sell them. So they don't get caught up. You go into a hypermarket or Walmart, and it's 90% local products. But Costco does the best it can to offer foreign products. People are funny; you go into a market, and everybody's very proud of their country. They're proud of themselves and their businesses. But they sure love imported products, and some countries don't even want to admit it. It was like nobody would ever admit that they prefer foreign products, but the foreign products, especially the Kirkland products, are a huge draw, a big part of their success.

### If it's as simple as entering a new country and having expats set up operations, then keeping those expats instead of hiring local folks to reduce costs, why wouldn't Walmart have figured that out and adjusted to have their other stores be successful?

When I went to China to help with their Sam's Clubs, they hired a completely new management team of all foreigners to develop the Sam's Club business there. Walmart goes through these phases, and after they go for a while, there's an assumption from the accounting departments, the finance guys, that now we can cut costs. It's like a rollercoaster with those guys and their leadership team. Doug McMillon knows this phenomenon well, and since taking over, he's done a better job of preventing that from happening. Still, for years, they just had these rollercoaster rides where they would go native, suffer, and bring in the expats. It's not something you turn around overnight; it takes years to turn around again.

Let’s talk about countries like Spain and Italy. We just took a trip to Italy on the coast, and I thought, this is such vertical living. We went to one guy's house, and everything he eats he grows on his vertical living plots of land. I thought about Costco and wondered how a concept like Costco would even do here. Conceptually, how does a concept like Costco work in countries where people buy fresh or pick their vegetables from their garden every day and don't store things for a long time? Could you walk me through some of the Costcos in Spain and France? Have these Costcos been struggling? Has Costco had to adjust?

The biggest challenge in those countries is government rules restricting size limits on retail facilities. Most of them have a 50,000 square feet limitation, which is impossible for a Costco to survive. That's been the more significant challenge. Costco there and in Asia, if they were to open in more of a rural community, even if their population is pretty good, wouldn't fare as well. They stay in the top cities and the higher-density populations. In France, that's one of the key things. Their success in France has not been as good as in Asia. It hasn't been horrible, but they're not seeing the strength they see in Asia. They're more focused on northern Europe than they are on Italy or Spain, in those areas.

### It sounds like the biggest limitation in southern Europe is warehouse size. It's not people's adoption or reluctance to shop at a concept like Costco. You don't see that as a barrier; it's mostly the government mandates.

Yes. The reception from members and the public is good, and it's growing. It's a little slower growth than it is in Asia. Still, the biggest challenge is government restrictions, fighting against behemoths like Costco, and having it affect the small mom-and-pop businesses you see in Italy and France. That's a big part of their economy, it's very protected, and it slows the development down in those countries.

### Let’s talk about northern Europe. There is a ton of competition in places like England with these Aldi concepts and other stores. How has Costco fared in some of the northern countries?

They've done well in the UK; again, it was a very slow burn initially. There was a lot of resistance, competition, and pushback from Tesco and all these guys. Tesco filed a lawsuit against Costco when Costco opened the first building. They tried to stop them from coming in, but Costco has done very well in the UK. But I think they’re seeing that they have maxed out the UK. I heard that the next building they’re opening would be the last one they plan on doing for a long time, so the UK is maxed out. They're looking further up north in the Scandinavian countries where the economies are tremendously strong, and there is a huge recognition of imported products and that type of thing. A lot of those countries don’t grow much of their own; the weather is not conducive to that kind of thing, so almost everything they consume is imported. It's accepted.

### On what grounds did Tesco file a lawsuit against Costco?

I don’t remember the exact grounds, it was back in 1993 or 1992, and it was just nuisance lawsuits. Trying to throw obstacles, I don’t know what they thought. Maybe they thought if they made life hard for them, Costco would just give up. The guy that ran Tesco at that time, I can't remember his name, but he was a Lord. When he retired 10 years later he said, the biggest mistake I ever made was trying to sue Costco. It was a waste of time, money, and effort, making Tesco more negative and Costco more positive. He said it was one of the biggest mistakes he ever made.

### My next question is more numbers based. We tend to invest long-term, and I need to put some understanding to paper of what is the TAM of total Costco stores. I'm trying to understand implicit or explicit terms, what methodology Costco uses to open stores internationally, and what metrics it looks at. There was a study in the US that looked at several factors. Costco needs a certain population base to draw from and foot traffic, so they looked at census tracts with certain population minimums, population density by state, median income, competition, and any cannibalization. They came up with an estimate that, at least in the US, they think Costco can open another 400 stores.

Yes, something like that. I saw the report.

### I'm trying to do a similar thing internationally. I did some rudimentary overview of the minimum GDP per store in the US for a Costco location, on average, and I went country by country and said this country has this GDP, so how many stores can their GDP support, given the US GDP per store? It's rudimentary and not scientific, but it gives some sense. And I adjusted by population density for every country, meaningfully reducing the number of stores. I don't have the Nordic countries, though, which seems to be from where the growth will come.

Yes, that's the European focus coming up because there are fewer restrictions, which will make it easier, and good economies and income. If you look at Costco's numbers, you can bet they're tremendously conservative every time. That's just their nature. We had to continuously adjust our parameters as we learned lessons in Asia. A good example is, we went into Korea and expected to be at close to eight clubs, and they will end up with double that. In Taiwan, it's the same. In Japan, we thought maybe 20 clubs, and we were there in a matter of years. We had to keep adjusting that because we always went in very conservatively.

> In China, once this pandemic is out of the way and China’s economy gets back to anywhere near normal, there’s a tremendous amount of growth potential for Costco. It's huge. Even with that being the one market in Asia with a solid competitor in Sam’s Club, the population density is so heavy in those markets, Shanghai, and all these Tier 1 cities; these guys can be a few kilometers away from each other and have no impact. The ability to grow is huge. In Korea, for example, when I opened one club in the 1990’s, the thing shot up, and within three years, it was a $400 million club in 150,000 square feet. We kept opening clubs close by to take pressure off, and the sales would drop a few percentage points and go back up with no impact. You will see real growth in the future for Costco and some of the other companies in Asia and Europe.

Primarily China when they get back in, and I think we'll see a big difference in how China approaches things after the Communist Party Conference in October, where they'll nominate Xi for his third term. Xi wants to be more popular and successful than Mao, which is important to him. That's why they're holding tight on all these Covid policies, the South China Sea policies, and everything else because he wants to appear strong. Once he gets that nomination and everything, you'll see him start turning that back to normal because their economy has taken a huge hit from these Covid policies. My friends in China all say it will roll back over very quickly after the party meeting, which is October 21st, I think.

### That's an interesting take. I was just listening to an economist discussing a fundamental change in China's approach. Since they can no longer deliver the economic growth of the prior 20 years, they will now turn to nationalism. This Pelosi-Taiwan showdown is just the opening salvo on it, and China will increase in return to nationalism. The US is not discouraging that either; they're sort of a willing participant. Interestingly, your take is that it's just a show of strength to win the nomination for the third time.

Absolutely. All the Chinese I know, that's the word inside the country with the people there. The Chinese are very smart people. The weakness of the government there is that, if you think back in history, can you ever remember when the Chinese government came out and said we were wrong about something? Never. Because they think that's weak. This country was founded on civil war and an uprising of the people. With 1.6 billion people, the Chinese government is afraid of its own people. The US isn't their biggest threat; it's their own people. If they get angry and want to make a change, they're in trouble because you can't control that population.

They keep a tight rein on things because of that mentality. But they're not stupid, they're very smart, and they know they have to get their economy fired back up because without that, they can't achieve everything they want to achieve both economically and militarily and have the money to pay for all that. They'll go back. They'll turn the corner once this meeting's over. Maybe we can have another conversation after that once we see how the direction goes, but that’s the word I get from inside there, and speaking to the leadership at Sam's and Walmart in China, they are of the same opinion as I am.

### That’s interesting.

Regarding growth, southeast Asia has opportunities, but GDP is a big thing. I lived in the Philippines, and there's a small club company that used to be a franchise of PriceSmart, which Sol and Robert Price started after they split with Costco. I think they have seven clubs; they do okay, but they're not run very well. They stay in very high-density population areas, and the income level densities will support clubs if you're in Kuala Lumpur or Manila. Once you start getting outside of those big cities, it's less and less. You get into the further out areas, and the available expendable income per household is quite low. But southeast Asia does have some opportunity; that's why I'm here in Bangkok now. We're going to open the first club format here on September 28th.

### Walk me through the process. We're sitting at Costco headquarters, and we say okay, there's a new country on a map, and we want to explore there. Or even to identify a country or a city. How was Iceland picked, for example? What metrics or analyses were used to select a city first?

One of the first things Costco looks at is government. I retired from Costco, and I decided to go back, and all they had was domestic for me. I like working in Asia, but I don't like domestic work. It's boring to me, so I chose to go to China and help Sam’s Club there because Jim Sinegal swore he would never open in China because of the Chinese government. But then Craig Jelinek took over; Craig follows Sinegal’s doctrine pretty closely, as you know, but he did override that and said he wanted to go into China.

Before the pandemic, I don't know if you were watching, but those clubs were tremendously successful. Just overrun. They had to close sometimes because they had to get the people out of the building. The police and fire departments were upset because you couldn't move inside the building because there were so many people; just a massive success. So the slowness right now is pure pandemic. Once we get beyond that, it'll go right back to it. Costco is staged very, very well to succeed in China.

When choosing they look at government, GDP, and expendable income is one of the big things they look at. Not just household incomes. Because in certain markets, people make less money, but their housing costs are tremendously cheap. Hence, their expendable income is probably relatively low compared to somebody living in downtown Shanghai where a one-bedroom apartment costs $2 million. You must be careful about looking at that, and Costco focuses on expendable income. They look at those different markets. But there are availabilities. One country that I think has great potential as an economy with household income and expendable income is Vietnam. They've got their Tier 1 and Tier 2 cities that could easily handle 12 or 14 clubs in Vietnam. Still, the easy, low-hanging fruit in Asia is China.

### In your opinion, how many clubs do you think Costco can open in China? What’s the total potential there?

> I think their first estimate was they would open 100 clubs and then look at it after that, but easily 200, given their success. It's a phenomenal market when things are going fine, outside this pandemic. Sam's is moving fast, but Sam's doesn't want to get into a head-on collision with Costco because it's never been a good result for them. They've pretty well mentally set themselves to share the market.

### These 100 stores, let's say. It took Costco less than 20 years to open the first store in China. Still, I guess there was know-how to be developed and relationships with the government. Not thinking about their supply chain and things like that, on a normalized basis, how many stores do you think they can open in China per year now that they've opened their first location?

For example, in the heyday in the US, when the growth was phenomenal, we opened about 20 clubs a year. Theoretically, given a strong real estate team, ten to 15 clubs a year is not a big hit once things return to normal.

### Would there be enough talent to help open that many clubs in China a year?

It's tough, the first club opened with a lot of Taiwanese transfers out of Taiwan, but they would be digging for talent. That's probably one of the more difficult things, but it's not impossible. Most companies rotate their people out every couple of years, and Costco doesn't do that. They pay their country managers well and allow them to run their kingdom. Look at the history of the guys there. Richard Chang, who runs all of Asia, came on board in Taiwan in 1999 and has been there ever since. The guy in Japan has been there for 20-something years. The guy running Australia has been there from the beginning and is not going anywhere. They don't lose people. It's just like how they run their business in the US; nobody quits. There's minimal turnover for that company. It's the same thing, those guys make enough money and, in terms of the living conditions, Costco takes excellent care of them. They're not going anywhere, so they don’t have this turnover and fluctuation of management style. Once again, consistency is a big plus for them, and they get it that way.

### Let's go country by country. When I looked at Canada, it seemed pretty saturated with 100-plus stores. Is there more potential in Canada, and if so, how much?

I think the overall growth in Canada for anything nowadays is in the single digits. We never thought we could open 100 clubs in Canada when we first went there. I wasn't involved in Canada, but I sat in the meetings and listened; I think the number was 30, and people were like, are you kidding? How are you going to get that? I think people are pretty shocked that they managed to get 100 clubs there, so single-digit growth in Canada is the limit. It's the same with Mexico, which has some room to grow but not a tremendous amount. Northern Europe and all of Asia are still happy hunting grounds for Costco.

### In the next 10 years, how many clubs do you think can be opened in all of Asia? If it's 150 clubs in China, you mentioned a nice potential for Vietnam. There's Taiwan, and Korea may or may not be saturated; I guess you could look at Australia differently.

Australia will perform very closely to Canada. They have a lot of room to grow.

### That’s a good point.

Their economy and structure are very similar to Canada, so they could easily do what Canada has done in Australia. As I said, China could be up to there within that time frame. If you're looking at the total potential within the marketplace, you could see 300 or 400 clubs in the next 10 years if they really wanted to do it.

### In all of Asia or China?

Asia.

### We talked about the Nordic countries in northern Europe being a potential; what do you think of the TAM, if you wish, in Sweden, Denmark, or Finland?

Those countries and their economies, governments, and lifestyles are once again very similar to Canada. It's not socialist government, but it's in that direction like Canada is. The lifestyle is extremely good in Northern Europe, and disposable income is considerably good. If you look at locations per population, those countries could duplicate close to what Canada has done.

### What about Germany? To me, it's one of the strongest countries economically in Europe, and I don't believe Costco has any stores there.

They don't. Germany has restrictive laws, and trying to get around those to achieve any real numbers in those countries is difficult. It’s a long-term commitment and a slow process. It's purely government issues because you're right; the economy is great, and the spending would be wonderful, but the restrictions are quite severe.

### Do you think this is something that just won’t be overcome and Costco will give up in Germany or is it something that will take another 20 years as China did?

Those guys don't give up on anything. If they see any possible light at the end of the tunnel, they will keep working it.

### We didn't discuss Latin America much, other than Mexico. I've penciled in some numbers for Brazil, the Caribbean, and other places like Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. Is that a focus or not? I guess the economic environment is very different and perhaps uncertain, like in Argentina. Is that a potential based on population and GDP numbers, or is it not realistic?

It's a potential. When we first started venturing internationally, we had an office in Brazil to pursue development. If you look at the company's history, you'll remember that early on, Carrefour had a 20% ownership of the company before the company went public; Carrefour invested money in Costco. They owned a tremendous amount of stock, and at that time, we would end up going head-to-head with Carrefour. So Carrefour divested themselves from Costco on the condition that Costco would stay out of the South American markets for some time. I don't remember how long, but I'm sure it's passed now. They had tremendous interest down there, and we walked away because of the Carrefour agreement. Brazil was a big target, and Costa Rica was another target. But they do have to look at the government stuff. Some areas have stable governments, some reasonably stable, and the economies are pretty good in some of those places.

Some tremendous population densities in South America have reasonably good economies and household incomes in the big cities where people make money. Again it's just like the Philippines; if you start going out in the rural areas, the economics make no sense. But as long as you stay in the big cities, South America is potential. As I said, we had tremendous interest years ago and walked away for the Carrefour reasons. I haven't heard any discussion from my network about going back down there, but if they were looking for a new market, they wouldn't run away from it because they seriously wanted to go in before.

### There could be potential, but it’s not something that Costco is looking at now. There's also this issue of some non-compete for some period that perhaps inhibited them initially. Still, now they have such huge success in Asia that maybe it's less topical but may become topical at some point.

Yes. Suppose they start feeling that to maintain the growth they want, they need another market other than Asia and Northern Europe. In that case, they might seriously consider that because historically, they have been interested, but there's no movement in that direction right now.

### Regarding the Nordic countries, what did we say about the overall potential for the number of clubs for Costco?

I don't know the populations there that well, so I suggest you look at the club density per capita in Canada, and take Canada's numbers and put that to the Nordic countries. That formula would probably be pretty close.

### Perfect, got it. I recently read an interview with a former Costco manager whose opinion was that Costco is starting to stray away from the Sinegal-embedded mentality of keeping to the margin and not changing prices for the core products, like their hot dog. I think the expert mentioned that the price for other core items, like bottled water, was raised, and Costco enjoyed tremendous margins during the pandemic, which is not something that Sinegal would have done. He would have cut prices and passed on the benefit of that margin to the club members. There's a general sense that Costco is straying away from its core philosophy. Would you agree with that or disagree with that? Any color you can shed there would be helpful.

It's not entirely wrong. I grew up under Jim, and I'm grateful to him; he taught me a lot, but he was very set in his ways. But it worked for us, and we all benefitted from it. Jelinek is as close to a Sinegal clone as you can get, and he has stayed very loyal to his teachings, except for what he did in China and a few things. So yes, some changes will happen, and there will be adjustments, of course, but a dramatic walk away from the Sinegal principles is not likely. Because those principles have done exactly what you and I have been talking about here. Jim was a driving force in why they're so successful internationally. We'd say, oh, you know, if we did this, Jim, it would be easier, and we'd get more properties, and he'd say hell no, we're not going to do that. This is our business; this is what we do. If we can't do it there, then don't go there. So we held to it. He was right, and the numbers show it. Costco is one of the most successful retail companies going into the Asian markets, especially in grocery and food. Ikea has done fabulously in the home furnishings business for the same reason. You go to an Ikea anywhere in Asia, and it looks like Ikea anywhere.

I met those guys. Their core principles are very similar to Costco's. They don't budge: this is how we run our business, so this is what we're going to do. This is what's successful, and this is what's made us. We're not walking away from it.

The one concession they've made here in Asia is they have a service that will come out and install and build your stuff for you if you don't want to do it yourself. They make money off of it. I have friends who have condos and stuff in Korea, and if they want to hang a picture on the wall, they call a maintenance guy to do it. They won't pick up a hammer to save their life. So that's their concession to Asia. I don't see them deviating off the consistency that much. Sure there will be some flexibility. But Jelenick say they had many opportunities to gauge that margin to a certain degree in some of these markets where there's little competition and haven't done it. They’ve continued to run their principle.

### That's a good point as well. Has Costco had to close many stores? In that case, what tends to go wrong? What happens? How does a store not work out?

> They have hardly closed any clubs in the last 10, 15, or 20 years. Anything they have closed has been because they were able to build a better building somewhere close, and it's just a move. The last time I remember closing stores was when we were very young, and we had about 16 clubs, I think, at the time. We opened up in the Chicago area, and I don't remember why, but those clubs were horrible. They were just terrible. We didn't have deep pockets back then; I don't think we were even public yet. So we closed four locations and walked away. That's the last time I remember that happening, probably in the late 80s.

### Costco already has the blueprints for what works. Costco is very conservative and diligent in how they approach each new location, so there are none, if any, failures when a Costco opens. In fact, clubs seem to exceed the expectations laid out.

Exactly. That's more the trend. Some people criticize them, I know Wall Street criticizes them periodically for being too conservative, but it's paid out and has worked for them. The consistency bred and trained into this over all these years is truly the core of their success.

### BJ's is the other concept. We talked about Sam's and how they tend to muck things up when they expand by making it look like the local hypermarket. I know BJ's is only US-based, but why has it been so difficult for BJ's to replicate Costco? Is it just the scale at which Costco operates, or have they not been able to drill these principles into their employees?

Their operating philosophies are somewhat different, but they have tried to venture out and jump into markets where they're going head to head with a Costco, and it's always ended horribly for them. They don't have the buying power because BJ's didn't grow as fast as Sam's and Costco did. They didn't buy up other companies. They didn't get that huge growth, so once that happened, the buying power of the competitor was so much bigger; it's huge. They missed the boat early on, and there's almost no recovery from it now.

### That was my sense as well; they can't negotiate at the same scale, and at this point, it's just a vicious cycle for them. Getting up to scale and scale begets more scale. I think we covered all my questions, and I think this was a terrific conversation. I learned a lot, and you gave me some excellent concrete answers to questions that may have been tougher to be concrete on, so I appreciate that. Thank you very much for your time, and have a wonderful evening, I guess if you're in Bangkok.

I've got everything here to shake a martini for myself, so I'm ready to go.