# [[Costco]]'s Cultural DNA: Working with Jim Sinegal

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Can you start with highlights of the activities you were involved in at Costco over what was a relatively long tenure?

I’m a former Costco employee, of 32 years. I off-ramped in April 2020 and, by May of 2020, I started my own business, consulting. I amassed a playbook of leadership and business acumen, under the development of Jim Sinegal.

When I started with Costco, of course you needed to behave yourself, but it was unvarnished; being a human being and recognizing that others are human too, was just something that was part of the company culture and remains so to this day. And it came from Jim.

When I did ultimately go to Washington and move to buying, which was fairly quick, I got to interact with \[Jim\] and hear him talk, see his actions. His office was right in the middle of the mezzanine of this building that was being leased by Costco, at the time; it was very early, 1988. He was just available for conversation, all the time. He was very nurturing and warm and, also, held people accountable in a very gentle way. He believed in telling the truth, first and foremost, no matter what. He believed that there would be trouble, we would make mistakes; just get a partner, tell the truth and find your way out of the problem together. He always believed in doing what you say and saying what you do. Costco is renowned for paying bills on time, if not early. To him, everything was about reputation and having a really grounded presence in any community, any environment, any person’s life, that you existed in. Showing that you honored everybody that was in those environments. It was just palpable.

### **What did Jim do to earn your trust?**

He remembered my name and he remembered things we talked about. He was building a company and, by that time, it wasn’t giant, but it was big enough. When he saw me, he didn’t look at my name badge, which would have been an easy thing to do. He truly remembered my name and would say hello to me, by name. He would ask me how it was going, is your husband here yet? He knew that my husband was coming behind me to move, because I moved so swiftly. It just made you feel known and a person. It made you want to have more conversations with him because you just felt as if your humanity was honored, in his presence. He didn’t feel like he was the CEO and the founder of a company, even though you knew he was. He just had a gentleness and an approachable demeanor.

There were times, when I would go to him on a business matter. If I was acting up or talking out of turn, because I was young, and I was learning, all he would do is look over his glasses at me for half a second, put his glasses back up, look at me, and then continue looking at whatever I was presenting to him. He didn't have to bark at me, do anything. It was very clear to me; you need to simmer down and back up. Not every boss understands that. I didn't understand that. I was a leader early, young and I made a number of mistakes. He probably did too, but I didn't witness those because he was further along in his career when he started Costco. But the cool thing is, out of his experience and his wisdom, he recognized my immaturity and didn't humiliate me because of it; he just checked me.

He didn't go around telling people about it. He didn't later bring it up to me. I remember one time divulging something to him. I had something personal going on, and I remember, a couple months later, saying something to my immediate leadership and they knew nothing of it. He had never repeated what I had told him. I sat on that and thought about that; in fact, today it still impacts me and I can feel it. He respected what was so personal and meaningful to me that he didn't think that it was such a business matter, he needed to tell my leadership. He respected me as a person that I would manage that well and he gave that opportunity to me.

### **How did he show you what really mattered to him, as an operator?**

> He would go to every single warehouse at least once a year. When I had the opportunity to be in his presence for warehouse walks, he would shake hands and talk to as many people as he could and he would remember their names, like I said, and he would have remembered something about them and ask them how this was going or how that was going. When there was trash on the floor – because in an environment where there's so many customers going through, and they do sampling and all the things, there's always some sort of trash on the floor – he would stoop and pick it up. People would rush to get it from him, out of his hands, or make sure they were first to pick things up. He just was the example. He walked and did everything he asked others to do.

He would pick up a broom. He wouldn't come out and say, "The bathroom's in disarray". He would come out and say, "Where's your sundries closet?" and he would go get toilet paper and go change the toilet paper roll in the bathroom. It wasn't that he was proving a point and trying to show people they weren't doing something. He was trying to say, this is not beneath me, and my expectation is that any one of you, having any one of these experiences that doesn't meet the standards that we're setting, just do it. Don't delegate it, don't go get somebody else, just do it yourself.

### So you moved into buying pretty quickly. The code of ethics and the rights of merchandising. How well established was that when you arrived?

It was fundamental, and it was framework and it was something that we were charged with using as our building blocks because we were building a company at that time. The company is still growing, but not at the rate and speed that it was then, because it was so early. I knew that I was in the formation of the foundation of the company, and it was our building blocks. I knew that the strength of the company built on the work that I and my team did, was going to be instrumental to the strength of the near, mid, and long-term foundation of the company. To do inventory replenishment, we came up with a formula that we would do, that would trigger whether or not we needed to buy inventory, because it was just-in-time inventory.

But you also needed to have a really pleasing supply presentation in the warehouse. We came up with a formula that we would do and, in that day, nothing was automated; we had to do everything manually. We sat with a 10-key and would calculate everything and handwrite whether or not something needed to be ordered, or didn't need to be ordered on a more than legal green bar, that was called a 'stock status' that we got fresh printed every Monday morning, and just meticulously went through that and then manually wrote the orders from that. We wrote dates when you needed to double check whether or not an order needed to be placed.

It was really exciting because you got to be a part of the entire supply chain. Not only were you placing orders, but then you're negotiating with the vendor on, how are you going to get the inventory there based on how much you need? Is it a full truckload or partial truckload? All of the details of building out supply chains and continuously asking for efficiencies. Can we strip even a penny out? A penny matters. Sales are growing at X, and is that creating efficiencies in your system? Am I ordering the most efficient way I could possibly be for your system? What would be the benchmark to get us to the next efficient trigger so that we can strip some costs out?

> One thing that Jim did is, he defended his buying teams to Wall Street and to stakeholders and if anybody complained about a buyer being tough, he would say, yes, our buyers are firm, but fair. Their first job is to defend the members and to make sure that the goods get landed to Costco's floor at the least possible price without compromising quality. So they're going to continuously challenge the system and challenge themselves. It's like a Rubik's cube. He would say, if they're being rude, or offensive, that's one thing. But if they're just being tough, and not taking 'no' for an answer, then I applaud them. That's exactly what they've been hired and trained to do. He would defend us, which was awesome.

### Did the business always use its power over suppliers responsibly, especially as you got bigger over time?

There was a couple of guiding principles. One was – and this has moved over time, because Costco has just grown and grown and grown and you have to be realistic about how much of the market you own in any given category or item – that you want to be somewhere between 20% and 50% of any given vendor, because then you put yourself in a situation where that vendor is fiscally dependent on your business; you aren't able to be nimble and get out of an item if it's not faring well. Put an item on rotation, if it needs a refresh, continuously create the 'treasure hunt' environment for the members that are shopping with you. You have to be ever mindful of that, and also you want to ensure – and this is a buyer’s responsibility – that the vendor is getting a fair return on the business that they're sharing with Costco.

A lot of that is just a lot of deep conversation and ferreting out, what are the real costs and what are you making as your net revenue on this business? You want to know what the gross revenue is – as close as you can get – and the net revenue – as close as you can get – so that you also know: is there unwanted fat in the system that you can work together in a partnership and orchestrate efficiencies? You can strip some of that fat out and share in those savings so that the buyer can give that back to the member. Part of the education process when it was early adoption for Costco was, the vendors were reluctant to give a lot of margin back to Costco because they knew Costco had a benchmark that the buyers were not allowed to go over a certain margin cap, which exists today. They would be, why would we give that money to you? You're just going to give it away. That's just money that one of us could keep in earnings.

There was a lot of education that Costco buyers got from their leadership, who got it from Jim, and when you had the opportunity to listen to Jim, you also got that, which was lovely, and then you would teach that to your vendors. Some were early adopters, and some have taken decades to understand that. It's really simple and it's really sophisticated, because you're dealing with some brand owners that have built name equity, that they feel has so much value that if they were to lower the price, to the point that Costco was asking, that it would denigrate their image. There's a lot of talk about image with some vendors who have really big brand names and Costco has to say, listen, this has not tarnished our image. We start talking about that, and the more you talk about it, you're just continuously teaching, what you learned from Jim, to vendors and all of the people you work with that are in these meetings, hear these stories too, because you're going to always have new people coming up through the system and Jim is no longer present. You want to be sure that his voice is reverberating through all of this at any given time.

### How did you do that?

You talk about it. In vendor meetings, you talk about it. In one-on-ones with your buyers and their teams, you talk about it. I did one-on-one mentoring, as an executive mentor, for several years. I would be assigned a mentee once or twice a year. I had a mentee one year and this new part of our program was that they needed to come up with a capstone project at the end of the mentee/mentor season. Her capstone project was she wanted to do mentor/mentee rings, so more people had an opportunity to be exposed to the mentorship process, because there was only so many mentors to go around, so we agreed to that.

### When you joined, what made it clear to you what the red lines were in terms of behavior? Can you talk about types of behaviour that were not tolerated in buying.

I can quote somebody that I heard say this more than once, and it's Richard Galanti, who's the CFO. He would say that, basically, Costco is a 'no asshole' environment. He'd say, as soon as you find somebody who's just downright mean or malicious, you probably have one, maybe two conversations with that person to get that turned around. If they can't, then they just don't belong there. That's basically how it is. It's a large company now, and politics do play a role and I don't mean to set make it sound like it's Utopia. I do, though, want to make sure that it comes across that the intent is to just do what's right, because it's right. Even if it's the hardest thing to do, you have to do it, because it's the right thing to do. Just grab the partners so that you have strength in numbers. Don't do what's easy, and be deceitful or be mean, and try to destroy others because, in the long run, that's cancer in a system, and we just can't have that.

### Did the way you treated suppliers change over time at all?

Everything's a two-way street, but it's a two-way street with vendors. Same thing; vendors could swiftly lose their business with Costco, if it was found out that they were being deceitful, in any fashion, whether it's lying, misrepresentation of facts, or breaking the law. Once there was proof, then that would be addressed with the vendor, they'd be given an opportunity to come clean and, potentially, rectify the situation, depending on how egregious what they did was. However, I had seen over the years, vendors have very rich relationships with Costco and very prosperous business, and they destroyed it by being deceitful. That's just the way it is.

The other way is, if a buyer is deceitful towards a vendor, of course, that's a no-go, that's a showstopper. If a buyer is belligerent to a vendor, then that'll be addressed, the behavior should be corrected. If it can't be, then they may get demoted or relegated to another area. Some damages might come from that.

One thing that's a no-go, that Jim talked about frequently, is the Calvin Klein jeans. The buyer brought Calvin Klein jeans in, of great value to the marketplace and over time, with volume and continuous negotiations over efficiencies, was able to get the price down to say $29.99 and $24.99 then $19.99. He talked about the temptation of the buyer to keep part of that back and inflate their margin because there was such large price depreciation from great negotiations. But there was a margin cap that Costco always had, which was 14%, and if the buyer had kept some of that back and inflated their margin, which would have helped them make numbers, which would have had great pay outs for bonuses, and even the department overall then – in Jim's words – that would have caused an environment where the buyer would have been terminated for that. But because the buyer believed in his teachings and what the company stood for – and that is bringing quality goods to the market at the best possible price – they continued to take just the margin that was allowed and take their price down with every subsequent cost decrease. That is honoring exactly the commitment to the membership who's paying to shop with Costco. He was very proud of that; he used that example time and time again, and that buyer got a lot of praise and accolades, by way of that being such a demonstrable story.

### Did that change at all, over time, in your 32 years at the business?

> The guiding principle is to keep margins; each individual item stands on its own, in each individual warehouse, because it costs different to get goods to market in geographic areas, to not exceed a margin cap that is pre-established by the company. A buyer is not to exceed that.

### What are your favourite stories that defined Jim's character?

The Liquor Board in Washington State used to run state-owned liquor stores, which shut Costco out of being able to have any ability to sell spirits on their floor. Jim believed that there was significant margin to be found, built in to that those liquor sales, that the consumer should be benefiting from having lower prices. He took the state of Washington on over that, and it took quite some time. He fought the state, and what happened eventually is the state's liquor license and liquor stores closed and Costco, and every other retailer, is now able to dispense and sell liquor spirits.

While that was a win, because now it's no longer a monopoly of the state, one thing the state did to continue to reap the benefits of that revenue, was they assessed liquor taxes. The consumer didn't necessarily reap the benefit of that hard won battle, other than convenience. The state still makes their money, and there most likely was that built in cost because the taxes are quite high. If you buy spirits in Washington State, you would recognize that immediately. However, he was able to break up what he felt was monopolistic behavior, and create an environment of access, where shoppers now can go to Safeway, Fred Meyer and Costco and add that to their grocery list and not have to make a specific stop to a specific store that has abbreviated hours of access, which I think is great. He took on a state and a system and was able to break through that.

Now he believes that he espoused 'obey the law'. That was a case where he wanted the law changed, because he felt like it was unfair. He believed that. You obey the law, as long as it's fair. If it's not fair, then we figure out, can we fight that law and do we think we can win? Because we need to fight on behalf of our member who pays us to shop with us. That is our promise to them. We're their gatekeeper and access to making their wallet go further.

Another cool thing he did, in 2006 to 2008, when the US housing market was plummeting, the stock market was plummeting, several companies were being found out to be really dishonest and were collapsing. He came to buying, and said, I want a list, number of items that everybody puts in their basket. Our consumers need this. Everybody's being impacted by this financial fall in the United States. This is when the auto industry fell. It was just a pretty big depression period for the US, and I don't know that the government is calling it a depression, but I'm going to as a consumer, and an individual in the US. He came immediately to buying and said, every item that goes in our members’ baskets, we need to take them to cost, immediately. We can afford it, we have money, they can't. We need to help them in this time of need in trouble. It went from a small number of items, and then he came back and he wanted a larger number of items. Then he came back, and he wanted an even larger number of items.

First, it was going to be for this period of time, which was a relatively short timeframe. Then the number of items and the timeframe expanded, and so on and so forth. He just maintained that to ensure that our members were taken care of, in the best way he possibly could do that. The cool thing he did too, at the end of the year, when buyers have to do a fiscal recap, and they're paid on a bonus based on those earnings and all these different metrics, he asked for, what did that buyer contribute to this initiative? He didn't dock them in what they could have earned on their bonus from having done that for the members. He didn't count that against them.

Another thing that he did that demonstrated that he was just such an upstanding man was, the company honestly made a tax error. I don't remember the value of the tax error; it was large. They had brought some companies on-site to help them go through the taxes because the company was getting so large, and there was so much accounting to be done. They wanted outside eyes, and they found this tax error. But as soon as they figured it out, they paid the tax because Costco is pretty cash heavy, because they just did a buyback. He and Jeff – who rest his soul passed away – didn't take their bonuses that year because the company had to pay that tax bill. They felt like they should have seen that, or they should have known about it or regardless, they want to take responsibility for that. It was a burden to the company to pay for that tax error, although they paid for it swiftly and immediately as soon as it was found and verified to be true. They didn't want to burden the company further by taking their bonuses. So they just said, this year we're foregoing those, which was a fantastic example to all the employees. Everybody chattered about that. It just breeds security and breeds trustworthiness, by doing the right thing, because it's right, even if it's hard.

### How did Jim think about the role of the stock price in retaining top executives at your time in the business?

I'm going to answer that a different way because I can recount some things that Jim said, and what he would say was, while shareholder value is important, it is not our guiding principle. When shareholders wanted him to reduce benefits given to the employees because it would increase profitability for the company and, therefore, increased profit share, he said, absolutely not. I am not going to take profits out of my employees’ check books and give it to the shareholders. The street can wait. The company is good and solvent, and I'm not making my employees pay for increased shareholder value. He just absolutely would not do it. He was very vocal about that. You could tell it was irritating to him, that anybody would even ask such a thing. Or why do you pay your employees so much? Maybe you could give them lower pay increases to increase share value. He's like, again, my employees are not paying for your share value. I cannot retain good employees, and continue to make them feel appreciated as I appreciate them. And I tell them, I need to show them by giving you their pay, I'm not doing it. That made me so loyal to him and the company. If a head hunter came, I'd be like, I'm not leaving this company, because I'm not going to believe that you would do that for me.

### In motivating you, in your work, what role did the stock price and the growth in the stock price play, for you personally?

That was a part of my compensation package. That wasn't what mattered the most to me. What mattered the most to me was being appreciated for my work. Stock price, and the number of shares I got, were part of my standard package. I couldn't really change that other than doing my job well, and having my team members do their job well, and supporting them in that. What mattered to me was the metrics that drove the value of my bonus, because that was within my control, within my team's control. It was a direct reward and impact on what I and my team delivered to the company. For me, it wasn't about delivering to the shareholders; it was about delivering to the company.

Was I going to get a stellar raise? Was I always going to get a good review? Was I meeting all my metrics on my bonus structure? Would I get paid a bigger bonus than the average of the mean, because there was always an over/under? I just really worked hard for the company to drive those metrics. When I laid out my goals and my team's goals, they laid out their goals, and we all approved and agreed on them, and I would share my goals, and they would share theirs. Together, we just drove hard after those because they were meaningful to the company, they were meaningful to the business, and we were the gatekeeper for our members. We were delivering to all of the stakeholders, and it mattered to me a lot.

### What do you feel were the most important determinants of your behavior, in the context of the incentives and the incentive scheme?

Right or wrong – and some people might call it right, some people might call it wrong, some people might say, it's a little bit of everything – I have a very strong sense for the truth, maybe to a fault. I would say that, even in the face of fear or repercussions, I would be honest, come what may. I would say a lot of that also comes partly from Jim, and my formative years with him, I really believe; I started with Costco when I was very young. I believe that his leadership was very fatherly to me, and I really had a second formation period in my life when I started working in his environment. My parents are still married and they're 79 and 80, and they've been together now for 60 years. It was dinner on the table at 6pm every night.

Truth was, and is, a really fundamental principle in my family. I think too, people who start at Costco when they're older, have a lot of that formed already. People come from all different family environments. Jim hasn't been there now in about a decade; Craig has been running the ship. They hear Jim stories as lore, instead of actually having the impact and experience and feeling it. I think, fundamentally, Costco does everything they can to hire good people and promote good people and people who stand for all the metrics that Jim founded the company on. I just think that they get it right most of the time, and they get it wrong sometimes.

### What was the system for reporting problems in the business?

It was an open-door policy. You would go to your next leader, hopefully. You could go skip everybody and go outside and go straight to the CEO, if you wanted to. The request is that you go to your next in line leadership, and tell them what's going on and take them with you, as your partner, to solve whatever might be going on in the environment. Whether it's a deal with a vendor, of course, you would take your first in line. Hopefully, you would have trust with that person. If it was a fellow employee, or it was somebody who is reporting to you, that you would get your immediate leadership involved and then your immediate leadership would assess whether or not they felt the two of you could handle it or if they needed to bring in other resources. Now, HR is there, however, HR is there, legally, and they're there to have a legal arm of employee interfacing and protections and conflict resolution. They're not there to nurture and mentor. That's what your leadership is for.

### What is Jim's legacy, to you?

I am deeply and eternally grateful that my leadership formation occurred under his steady hand and presence and all the principles he espoused and that my business acumen was developed within Costco's framework. It's my opinion that Jim is one of the foremost leaders in the entire world. I would say he and Alan Mulally are two of my most revered leaders that I look to for insights and influence and direction. I would not have wanted to learn business principles in any other company than Costco, because Jim was so principled about doing what's right, because it's right. I just felt like truth and honesty prevailed at all junctures, and it was freeing.

It was liberating. It was less encumbered than it could have been, because I didn't have to run the gauntlet. It felt like you're appreciated for being who you are. Show up, authentically. Don't be an asshole. There's a difference, because you can be mean spirited or you can be tough. There's two ways of doing it, and the mean-spirited way is not the right way. To be tough, and not be afraid of tough conversations, but being nurturing and appreciative, those are all the things that he showed and demonstrated, which made me feel at home because that's kind of who I am. I'm certainly not Jim, and I don't even mean to say that. However, I feel like he gave me the opportunity to grow into who I am.

### Charlie Munger has been on the board at Costco for some time. To what extent was his presence in the business felt or talked about?

I would say probably at the 'senior senior' level he's talked about, but at the VP level and below, it's known that he's there and that he's good friends with the Oracle of Omaha who has a really great reputation for being an amazing leader too, but he doesn't really interact with the people, per se, so I can't say I felt his presence. It would have been lovely to have felt his presence. I would have liked to have known the man. I only have read about him. Have you met him?

### I haven't. Was he at all visible in the organisation?

I was pretty networked in that organization, and I didn't hear of it. That's not at all to slight him. It could be that I just didn't have an open ear to it and I missed it. I just didn't hear it.

### What do you think Jim saw in Craig, in your experience?

What Jim saw in Craig is man who had been successful in every leadership position he'd been put in in the company, and that he did a good job of appreciating the people and that he had endless energy to do all the things needed that Jim did, like visiting all the warehouses and travelling so much. Craig does talk about, openly, that he doesn't have work-life balance because his life is his job. He's not the president; that's Ron. Being the CEO of Costco, being a multibillion-dollar multinational corporation, having that level of dedication, and not having other things dividing you, is really hard to find. I think that his dedication and love for the company, it's like a pot of gold.

### What did Jim see in Ron \[Vachris\]?

Ron has a lot of energy, and he loves the company. He is so in the weeds and knows so much detail of the company that Jim did too. When you have a conversation with Ron, Ron can be very gregarious and engaging and charismatic, and be in the weeds and know the details and be able to pretty much tell you anything that's right there in front of you or things that are in the corner. He just has a pretty big capacity for the business in his brain.
