# Costco Annual Letter 1998

December 10, 1998 

**Dear Shareholder: **

Fiscal 1998 represented another year of outstanding results for Costco, with record sales and earnings, continued expansion in the U.S., Canada, and abroad; greater values in the products and services we offer our members; and further strengthening of the Costco name. 

The following recap details our Company’s progress and plans: 
- Fiscal 1998 Operating Results 
- Fiscal 1998 Activities and Accomplishments 
- Outlook and Plans for Fiscal 1999 and Beyond

## Fiscal 1998 Operating Results 

Costco’s fiscal 1998 operating results, like those of the prior fiscal year, reflect improvements in virtually every area of the Company. Net sales for the 52 weeks ended August 30, 1998 increased 11% over the prior year—from $21.5 billion in fiscal 1997 to $23.8 billion this past year. Comparable sales (sales in warehouses open more than a year) increased 8%; and average sales per warehouse reached $87 million, a level of sales productivity significantly greater than the estimated $40 million and $50 million being realized by the other two major participants in the membership warehouse club industry.

We attribute these strong sales results to several factors, including creative and exciting merchandising programs; a fanatical adherence to strict pricing disciplines whereby the majority of any cost savings is passed on to the customer; a fantastic group of employees; and clean and well-run facilities that are fun to shop. With these attributes at the core of our operating philosophy, comparable warehouse sales have continued positive into the new fiscal year, with an 8% increase being reported for the first 13 weeks of fiscal 1999, ended November 29th. 

These strong sales trends, combined with improved gross margins and membership fee income and good expense control resulted in another year of record earnings. On a reported basis, net income in fiscal 1998 increased 47% to $459.8 million, or $2.03 per share, from $312.2 million, or $1.47 per share the prior year. As discussed more fully on page 10 of this Annual Report, the fiscal 1997 earnings results were negatively impacted by certain one-time charges. Excluding these charges, the year-over-year earnings increase was still an impressive 28%.

Membership fee income in fiscal 1998 increased by more than $49 million, or nearly 13%, over the prior year, the result of new membership signups, continuing high renewal rates of existing members and a five dollar increase last Spring in our annual membership fee for Gold Star, Business and Business Add-on members—the first overall increase in membership fees in five years. This fee increase, when annualized, will generate nearly $65 million in incremental membership income, which will allow us to further increase Costco’s competitiveness in the marketplace, and we believe, generate greater levels of sales and profitability over the long-term. We are also encouraged by the initial results of our Executive Membership program, which we began rolling out in fiscal 1998. This program is discussed further in our plans for fiscal 1999 and beyond.

Our gross margins increased from 10.10% in fiscal 1997 to 10.28% in fiscal 1998—continuing the string of margin increases over the past five years despite being ever more competitive in the marketplace. Our ability to improve margins while lowering prices is a result of many factors, including volume purchasing power; efficient distribution of merchandise through our depot facilities; increased sales penetration of higher margin ancillary departments (such as pharmacy, optical, hearing aid and one-hour photo operations) and our expanded ‘‘Kirkland Signature’’ private label program; as well as strong operational controls over merchandise markdowns and inventory shrinkage. 

For the third consecutive year, we reduced our operating expenses as a percent of sales—from 8.74% in fiscal 1997 to 8.69% in fiscal 1998. This reduction was, of course, aided by comparable sales growth, as well as our continuing emphasis on operating efficiencies and cost controls throughout the Company. We continue to believe we can and should be even more efficient in the operation of our business, and we assure you we will not become complacent in the area of cost containment.

## Fiscal 1998 Activities and Accomplishments 

Our fiscal 1998 expansion program totaled a net of 17 warehouse openings, including six internationally. We opened twelve new warehouses in the U.S., including five warehouses on May 1st in the Detroit area. These five warehouses were the result of an opportunistic real estate purchase from Hechinger Company, which after retrofitting and expanding these buildings to Costco standards, gave us an immediate, strong presence in this new market. To date, the results in Detroit have exceeded our expectations. Together with seven additional openings in existing U.S. markets (including our third unit in Atlanta and the relocation of our Pomona, California warehouse to nearby Chino Hills), we ended fiscal 1998 with 211 warehouses in the U.S.

Our international openings included two new warehouses in Canada (in St. Jerome, Quebec and Kingston, Ontario) and our seventh warehouse in the UK (in Edinburgh, Scotland), which has continued the strong growth in sales and profitability of our UK operation. We expanded further in Asia in fiscal 1998 with the formation in June of a joint venture with Shinsegae Department Store Co., Ltd. to purchase from Shinsegae three membership warehouses in Korea—in Seoul, Taegu and Taejon—with Costco as the majority (94%) and controlling partner of the venture. Prior to this purchase these units had been operated under a license agreement. Additionally, in May 1998, the Company announced it had signed a lease to construct a 135,000 square foot Costco warehouse as part of a ‘‘US-style’’ shopping center in Fukuoka, Japan. The opening is scheduled for the spring of 1999. To support our Asia operations we have put together a strong management team consisting of experienced, in-country management and seasoned Costco personnel. 

As in recent fiscal years, more than $100 million of our Company’s fiscal 1998 capital expenditures budget was dedicated to ‘‘remodeling and improvement’’ efforts. Many existing warehouses were expanded and/or retrofitted to provide for expanded fresh foods offerings and additional ancillary operations, such as pharmacy, optical and one-hour photo labs. Several locations were physically expanded, and one warehouse was relocated, as mentioned above. At fiscal year-end, 32 of our warehouses had gas stations, up from ten at the beginning of the year.

On the financial front, Costco ended fiscal 1998 with a strengthened balance sheet: increased cash and short-term investments generated from strong operating performance in fiscal 1998; a more favorable debt to equity ratio; and inventory levels, not only positioned well for the 1998 holiday season, but approximately 85% financed with trade payables. The combination of significant debt reduction in fiscal 1997 and strong cash flows in both fiscal 1997 and 1998 also helped to improve the Company’s fiscal 1998 earnings. In fiscal 1998, net interest expense was nearly $40 million lower than in fiscal 1997. Lastly, in early November the Company announced that its Board of Directors had authorized a stock repurchase program of up to $500 million of Costco Common Stock over the next three years. Given Costco’s strong balance sheet position, and our confidence in the Company’s prospects going forward, we believe this investment in Costco common stock will be beneficial to the long-term interests of Costco shareholders, and we will cautiously seek the right opportunities to engage in stock repurchases

## Outlook and Plans for Fiscal 1999 and Beyond 

Last month, the Company began operation of its new Costco Online electronic commerce web site (www.costco.com) bringing to our customers an expanded selection of products and services that go beyond the walls of our traditional warehouse club operation. An initial selection of over 400 product offerings is consistent with Costco’s primary mission of selecting high-quality, name brand items at the very best price/value relationship—the same merchandising philosophy that established Costco as a premier retailer in the world today, supported by over 27 million Costco cardholders. Examples of products being offered by Costco Online include consumer electronics and cameras; computers and peripherals; office machines; toys and sporting goods; kitchen and housewares; home furnishings; collectibles; and diamonds, watches and other jewelry items.

In fiscal 1999, we will also continue the development and roll-out of our Executive Membership program. A total of nine services are now being offered under the Executive Membership program, and an introductory offer to become an Executive Member has now been mailed to approximately 81⁄2 million of our 16 million Costco member households, including all members in Arizona, California, Colorado, Maryland, Oregon, Virginia and Washington. Services for our Gold Star members include discounted auto and homeowner insurance; mortgage and real estate services; and residential long-distance telephone service. Discounted services for Business Members include business credit card processing; employee health care; business checks and forms printing; business long-distance telephone service; and small business loans. While all of these services are not yet available in each of the markets in which we operate, we are pleased that over one million of our members have taken advantage of the introductory one-year free upgrade to become an Executive Member. During fiscal 1999, it will be incumbent upon us to complete the roll-out of the Executive Membership program to the remaining seven plus million members and, perhaps more important, to effectively communicate to our members the dramatic savings that can be achieved from each and every service being offered.

In terms of new warehouse expansion, we are excited about our entry into several new markets in fiscal 1999, including the Chicago market, where we opened two new warehouses in mid-November—in the communities of Schaumburg and Oak Brook. We will announce other new markets as our plans become firm. Other fiscal 1999 openings in the US prior to the end of the 1998 calendar year included warehouses in Torrance, California; Christiana, Delaware; Union, New Jersey; Goleta, California and a replacement warehouse in San Bernardino, California. Fiscal 1999 openings in Canada prior to calendar year-end included warehouses in Port Coquitlam, British Columbia, and a replacement warehouse in Vaughn, Ontario, bringing to 285 the total warehouses now in operation. In addition, in the Fall of 1998 we opened two new warehouses in Mexico—in the greater Mexico City communities of Interlomas and Polanco—with our joint venture partner, Controladora Comercial Mexicana, bringing to 16 the number of warehouses now in operation in Mexico.

Our plans are to open a net of 20 to 22 warehouses in fiscal 1999, including those discussed above. These plans include 11 to 13 new openings in the U.S. and Canada (plus five relocations), one warehouse in Taipei, Taiwan, and our first opening in Japan—in Fukuoka. Our fiscal 1999 plans also include the continuation of a remodeling and retrofitting program, which will upgrade a number of our older facilities to include expanded fresh foods and ancillary departments—including expanded food courts, pharmacy and optical departments, and our very popular gas stations—all of which have enhanced our members’ shopping experience as well as increased sales and bottom-line profitability.

In summary, fiscal 1998 was a year of noteworthy accomplishments. We achieved record sales and earnings, increased shareholder value, grew our number of warehouses and membership base and enhanced our members’ shopping experience through upgraded departments and facilities, new membership services and, most recently, the ability to shop online through our Costco Online web site. These many accomplishments were the result of the combined efforts of our dedicated employees—now numbering over 63,000 worldwide—who have contributed to the success of Costco and helped position the Company for the challenges of fiscal 1999 and into the twenty-first century. Finally, we are appreciative of the continuing support from you, our shareholder. We look forward to seeing many of you at our Annual Shareholders Meeting in January. 

Best wishes for a Happy and Healthy New Year,

Cordially, 

Jeff Brotman, Chairman of the Board
Jim Sinegal, President & CEO
