# Costco Annual Letter 2008


**Dear Costco Shareholders, **

It has been twenty-five years since we opened our first warehouse near downtown Seattle, Washington in the Fall of 1983. In that first year of operations, $7.5 million of start-up capital was raised, with an additional $16.9 million raised after the opening of our first three warehouses (Seattle, Portland and Spokane); our original eleven-member management team was assembled; and seven warehouse locations were opened – four in Washington and one each in Oregon, Utah and Florida. We ended that first fiscal year with $101 million in sales; a $3.3 million “start-up” loss; 244,000 Costco members; and just over 1,000 employees. Six of the original eleven-person management team and more than four hundred of the original 1,000+ employees are still at Costco today! 

Much has been accomplished in Costco’s first twenty-five years; and despite a weakening U.S. and global economy, we completed fiscal 2008 on August 31st with record sales of $71 billion, a 13% increase over fiscal 2007. Comparable sales in warehouses open for more than one year grew 8% in fiscal 2008; and were 5% higher even after excluding the significant inflation in our gasoline sales results. Net income again exceeded $1 billion, and earnings per share increased nearly 22%. Today, Costco is the fifth largest retailer in the United States, the eighth largest retailer in the world, and the twenty-ninth largest company in the Fortune 500. We have come a long way in twenty-five years, and we believe we can continue to prosper in the future, with many opportunities for improving and growing our business. 

Costco is more than the world’s dominant warehouse club operator. We are the recognized pricing authority in every country where we do business, lauded for the high quality of our goods and services and the high caliber of our employees. The most recent American Customer Satisfaction Index again placed us at the top of the list of retailers for the fifth consecutive year, and Fortune Magazine named Costco the fourteenth most admired company in the U.S. this year. In terms of corporate philanthropy, we are actively contributing to every community in which we operate – whether it be reading programs in neighborhood schools; scholarship programs allowing disadvantaged students to attend college; or contributing and raising money for children’s hospitals across the geography of our operations. In just the past ten years, Costco has contributed more than $140 million to many worthy causes. 

We place a high value on environmental stewardship and protecting our resources. Our labor practices are routinely held up as a model for other companies, and our employee wage and benefit packages lead the retail industry. Just recently, a long-time Costco employee said, “it’s nice to work for a company that is not only successful and growing… but is also liked and trusted by both its employees and its customers”. This trust – this positive feeling towards Costco – is what each and every one of our more than 142,000 employees worldwide tries to achieve every day of the year. It is why we are excited, not only about our recent results, but also about our long-term future prospects!

Our business model is dedicated to driving sales. We pursue this goal from every perspective and consider it a key focus for every Costco employee. In fiscal 2008, our average sales per warehouse were $137 million, nearly twice that of our nearest competitor. We had two warehouses with sales exceeding $300 million; an additional eleven were approaching $300 million; and 52 of our warehouses had sales in excess of $200 million – a 24% increase from the prior year in $200+ million warehouses!

We are extremely proud of the quality and value of our warehouse ancillary businesses – pharmacies, food courts, optical and hearing aid centers, 1-hour photo and gas stations. These are “signature” departments that have been major contributors to Costco’s success for many years: generating good levels of profits, driving incremental sales and encouraging more frequent visits by our members. These businesses increased their sales by almost 30% in fiscal 2008, to nearly $11.6 billion, up from $9.0 billion in 2007. Leading these numbers were increasing gasoline sales. The tumultuous gasoline market impacts every segment of the world economy and has presented many operating challenges; yet through it all, Costco was able to sell more than two billion gallons of gasoline in 2008 and do so profitably.

We continue to operate top-rated optical centers, and our pharmacies showed strong sales and profit increases again in 2008. We receive national acclaim for our low prescription drug prices; and our member-friendly approach to Medicare Part D in the U.S. makes things easier and provides great value to our senior citizens. After successfully operating a state-of-the-art central prescription fill facility in the Northwest for the past two years, we are planning to open additional central fill operations in Northern and Southern California in fiscal 2009. These centers help us substantially reduce the cost of dispensing prescriptions. 

Every day is “High Theatre” in a Costco warehouse, with every aisle and every employee “showtime ready” to delight our members and, hopefully, exceed their expectations. This attention to detail is one of the many things that we believe sets us apart from our competition.

Shoppers enjoy being able to save on the basics and take advantage of high-end luxury items; and we provide plenty of both with great prices and excellent quality. We pride ourselves on our trend-setting merchandise mix, where shoppers can find everything from bath tissue to multi-carat diamond rings. 

People come to Costco for the treasure hunt – the search for that special item among our new and ever-changing merchandise and services presentations. With nearly fifty-seven million loyal Costco members, Costco has a following that is special in retail. Our members are intensely loyal, and our membership renewal rate continues at its highest level ever – 87%. Among our Executive Members, who typically shop more often and spend more, our renewal rate is even higher. Our annual membership income represented more than $1.5 billion in fiscal 2008; helping keep our cost structure low and our members loyal. 

Costco has what people need and what they want; and even in tough economic times, that translates into strong demand for Costco warehouses in communities all over the world. We have found that, far from being saturated, our marketplace continues to expand. Our long term goal continues to be the nearly doubling the size of our company over the next ten years; and we believe if we do it right, moving into new communities and infilling in current markets, we will see demand for our business continue to grow. We currently operate 550 warehouses: 403 in the U.S. and Puerto Rico, 76 in Canada, 31 in Mexico, 21 in the UK, six in Korea, five in Taiwan and eight in Japan. 

We opened 35 new warehouses in fiscal 2008 (including nine relocations), many in existing markets. Our 2008 U.S. openings included Maplewood, Minnesota; Colorado Springs, Colorado; Middleton, Wisconsin; Tallahassee, Florida; Woodland, California; West Albuquerque, New Mexico; Omaha, Nebraska; Selma, Texas and Montgomery, Alabama. Additionally, we continued our successful infilling in existing markets in fiscal 2008, adding new units in Parker and Sheridan, Colorado; Manteca (East Bay area) and San Dimas, California; Manahawkin (South Shore), New Jersey; Gig Harbor (Puget Sound area), Washington; and Columbia (D.C. area), Maryland. In Canada, we opened new warehouses in Medicine Hat, Alberta; South Winnipeg, Manitoba; Richmond Hill (Greater Toronto area), Ontario; and Candiac (Greater Montreal), Quebec. Internationally, we entered new markets in Iruma and Sapporo, Japan; Puerto Vallarta, Mexico; Cardiff, Wales; and Taichung, Taiwan. We also opened in Ilsan, Korea, northwest of downtown Seoul. We relocated nine warehouses into new larger and better-located buildings in fiscal 2008, enabling us to better serve our members. These included units in Antioch, Visalia, Victorville and Chico, California; Brick Township, New Jersey; Mesa, Arizona; Kendall, Florida; Union Gap, Washington; and Willingdon, British Columbia.

In preparation for the 2008 holiday season, we opened eight new warehouses since fiscal 2009 began in September: in Peterborough, Ontario in the greater Toronto area; the high-end Galleria area of Houston, Texas; Pocatello, Idaho; Covington, Washington, a southern suburb of Seattle; Brandywine, Maryland, in the Washington DC/Arlington metro area; St. Charles, Illinois, in greater Chicago; and Croydon, England, in south London. We also opened a relocated building in Bloomfield, Michigan and are in the process of converting our downtown Las Vegas warehouse into a Costco Business Center to serve the many businesses in that city. Our plans call for opening an additional 16 to 18 new warehouses and relocating two more prior to the close of our 2009 fiscal year in August 2009; four of these will be international units. In particular, we look forward to opening our first unit in Australia during the summer of 2009. With a population of 20 million people, economic and political stability, strong spending power and a demand for brand-name products, we believe Australia will be a good fit for Costco. We are truly an international Company. In addition to the forty states in the U.S., we now operate in Puerto Rico, in nine Canadian Provinces, as well as in Mexico, the United Kingdom, Japan, Korea, Taiwan and soon Australia.

Our Company now operates six successful Business Centers in the U.S., primarily dedicated to helping our business members. We see an opportunity to grow this business in fiscal 2009, and are evaluating several sites in metropolitan areas.

To support our warehouse operations, we continue to enhance the efficiency of shipping and delivery through our cross-dock depot operation. This year, we will add new cross-dock facilities in Airdrie, Alberta; Tepeji, Mexico; and Frederick, Maryland. We consider our “state of the art” depot operations to be one of the most efficient forms of distribution in the world. 

In addition to our “brick and mortar” operations, which is the heart of our business, Costco continues to be highly successful in the e-commerce arena, where members can order products generally not found in our warehouses on-line. Both our U.S. business, costco.com, and our Canadian operation, costco.ca, along with the e-commerce portion of our Business Delivery operation, posted record sales increases in fiscal 2008, bringing in nearly $2.0 billion of revenue in the U.S. and more than $150 million in Canada, all at profitable levels. By utilizing the same creativity and efficiencies that characterize everything we do at Costco, we have created a high level of loyalty among our online shoppers; and we expect to grow this business to $5 billion within the next several years.

Costco is operated with the highest degree of fiduciary integrity and responsibility, and we are proud of our healthy balance sheet and strong cash flow. We expended nearly $3 billion for three major activities in FY 2008. The largest amount, $1.6 billion, went for capital expenditures, primarily the construction of new warehouses and depots, as well as the remodeling, expanding and upgrading of many of our existing buildings. We spent almost $900 million to buy back 13.8 million shares of our common stock. Since inception, our stock buy-back program has enabled us to purchase nearly 17% of the outstanding shares of Costco stock through the end of fiscal 2008. By repurchasing shares of stock, the Company believes that it enhances its earnings growth and offsets dilution from stock option exercises and restricted stock unit grants. In addition, we recently increased our quarterly cash dividend from $.145 a share to $.16 a share; and paid out over $265 million in dividends to our shareholders in fiscal 2008.

We continue to emphasize cost controls in every area of our business and are pleased that we were able to reduce our operating expenses as a percentage of sales in fiscal 2008. There are ample opportunities for Costco to improve our business, and we will continue to stress cost containment and expense reduction in 2009.

All of us are dealing with the challenges of increased inflation. At Costco, we have experienced more price increases from our suppliers in fiscal 2008 than any time in the 25-year history of our business. In many instances we were able to make buy-ins (purchasing large amounts of product prior to price escalations) in order to hold off price increases to our members for as long as possible. Since the beginning of September (our new fiscal year 2009) we have seen some mitigating of these price escalations as a result of falling fuel and commodities prices.

It is our total dedication to Costco’s mission statement, to continually provide quality goods and services to our members at the lowest possible prices, that allows our Company to continue to outdistance the competition despite the challenging economy and lackluster retail environment. Rather than a time to pull back, we see this as an opportunity to increase our market share and build our supplier relationships, in some instances with new suppliers. We strongly believe in our partnership with our suppliers. We are tough but fair negotiators; and believe both parties can profit. Each year we add many new suppliers to our team, and we are particularly pleased to have initiated relationships with Godiva Chocolates, Martha Stewart (food products), Kenneth Cole (handbags), Herman Miller (office), Andrew Marc, O’Neill and Marc Ecko (apparel), and Waterford (crystal), among many others, in 2008.

Costco has always sought to be a good steward of the environment, and we continue to pursue new initiatives and implement new policies that enhance our performance in this important arena. The Company has created a “Greening of Costco” task force which is at the forefront of this endeavor. We have an extensive recycling program that includes the efficient and environmentally protective recycling of cardboard and paper, photo lab silver, junk tires and broken pallets. We are actively pursuing energy conservation, with skylights in all warehouses. Solar panels have now been installed in 17 of our locations. We are developing recyclable merchandise packaging and have also redesigned packaging where possible to enable us to place more product on a pallet, effectively reducing the number of delivery trucks on the road. The Company also is pursuing sustainable growth and seeks to work with free trade suppliers.

Costco is a great place to work and a great place to shop; and our focus will be to continue to grow long-term shareholder value. Our strong balance sheet, operating efficiencies, and creative approach to merchandising should see us safely through the current downturn in the economy and enable us to not only survive, but grow during these challenging times. We intend to carry out our current expansion plans and grow our market share, becoming an even stronger, more successful Company, increasing our sales, our profits and the satisfaction of our many Costco members.

As founders of Costco we have always considered our greatest contribution to be the growth of our management team – one strong enough to run the large and complex business that Costco has become. We have 142,000 fantastic, well-compensated employees worldwide who enjoy working at Costco and view their jobs as careers with advancement opportunities; we are talented merchants with high quality goods to sell; and perhaps most important, we have created an environment where more than 57 million loyal Costco cardholders have come to value Costco as their primary shopping destination.

Make no mistake, 2009 will be a challenging time for all people and businesses around the world. We consider Costco to be in a unique position as a result of our favorable business reputation and the extraordinary value concept we represent. Costco’s management team and all of our employees around the world thank you for your confidence and for your part in our successful quarter-century. We thank you for your continued trust and support and look forward to seeing many of you at our upcoming Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 28, 2009, in Bellevue Washington. May you have a blessed holiday season and a peaceful and prosperous new year. 

Warm Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Jim Sinegal

