One way of assessing the durability of a competitive advantage is to [[Inversion| invert]] the analysis. Instead of looking at what supports a competitive advantage, we analyze what it would take for a newcomer to replicate the business and remove the advantage. Such analysis often reveals idiosyncrasies that can be instructive in assessing a business' quality.

Take two examples. In the liquor business, white spirits are probably more at risk from disruption than brown spirits, no matter how strong the brand. While clever marketing and deep pockets enable new entrants to develop a competitive brand of gin or vodka, it is challenging to do with cognac or whiskeys. For one, brown spirits require aging, entailing not merely creativity and resources but unusual patience (often over ten years) for rivals to have even a shot at building a credible portfolio of brands. At the other end of the spectrum, in the white spirit market, potatoes can be transformed into cash within the space of a month.

Or consider backward induction in aircraft engine manufacturing. While capital is rarely an insuperable barrier to entry, the engine industry has spent billions in the past decade on R&D. All of that investment has generated proprietary technology that would be difficult to match. In addition, the industry generates substantial revenues from servicing engines apart from selling them, giving them a long time horizon over which to recoup investment. Start-ups in this field would also have to overcome the considerable attachment that manufacturers like Airbus and Boeing have to their stalwart suppliers, and I am not even talking about the strong switching costs related to the risks of switching to another technology where cost of failure would be gigantic. 