# Costco Annual Letter 1999
December 10, 1999

**Dear Costco Shareholders, **

Fiscal 1999 was a banner year for Costco in terms of revenues and earnings. We were able to achieve sales of $27 billion, which was a 13% increase over the prior year. More importantly, warehouses that were open for more than 12 months realized a comparable sales growth rate of 10%. We believe this is an accurate indication of the health of our business, considering that our average sales per warehouse exceeded $94 million per unit for the 292 locations open worldwide in 1999, including $101 million per unit for the 221 warehouses in the U.S. 

Our reported net income for fiscal 1999 was USD 397 million, or USD 1.73 per diluted share, compared to the prior year’s reported net earnings of USD 460 million, or USD 2.03 per share. As reported to you earlier, and as described in the financial discussion detailed further in this annual report, fiscal 1999 net income was negatively impacted by a USD 50 million ( USD 30 million after-tax) fourth quarter provision for impaired assets and warehouse closing costs, as well as a $118 million after-tax charge recorded in the first quarter related to a change in accounting for membership fees. Excluding these two items, our fiscal 1999 net income would have been $545 million, or $2.36 per share. Similarly, if the new accounting treatment for membership fees had been in effect in fiscal 1998, net earnings for fiscal 1998 would have been $444 million, or $1.96 per share; and the year-over-year earnings and earnings per share increases would have been 23% and 20%, respectively.

Equally important in the performance of our Company this past year were the operational improvements we achieved throughout our business. We continue to show robust sales increases in the new markets of Atlanta and Detroit, and our newly opened Chicago warehouses are exceeding our sales expectations. The results in these three markets have encouraged us to open additional units in each of these communities. Our new units in Tennessee (one in Nashville and two in Memphis) are brand-new and also performing very well. Additionally, we are proceeding with plans to enter new markets in Texas, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Missouri during calendar year 2000. Depending upon permitting and construction, these new warehouses will open in the summer or fall of next year. We expect that we will open approximately 25 new units this fiscal year, with the bulk of these openings being in existing markets such as California, Florida, Arizona, Washington, New York and New Jersey. Four to six additional warehouses will be relocated this fiscal year to improved sites and facilities. This compares to fourteen new warehouses and seven relocations in all of fiscal 1999. The majority of the fourth quarter charge for impaired assets and closing costs is a result of these recently completed and planned relocations for 1999 and 2000. All told, we plan to spend nearly $1 billion in fiscal 2000 on capital expenditures. While the majority of these expenditures will be directed towards new and relocation warehouse construction, approximately $200 million is planned for remodelling and ancillary business expansion activities—activities that, we believe, allow Costco to maintain its leadership position in the marketplace.

Our gross margins continue to be strong, increasing from 10.28% of sales in fiscal 1998 to 10.40% in fiscal 1999. Overall, our gross margins have now improved for six consecutive years, despite the fact that we have consistently lowered the prices of our merchandise during that same period of time. This is the result of improved purchasing, better utilization of depots and logistics, increased sales penetration of certain higher margin businesses, and record performance in shrink control by our merchants and operators. In terms of our depot ‘‘cross docking’’ operations, which allow us to reduce even further the freight and handling costs of the merchandise we sell, we plan to spend nearly $200 million in fiscal 2000 to add 1.5 million additional square feet to a business operation that we believe furthers our advantage over our competitors in bringing goods to market at the lowest possible prices.

Our operating expenses declined as a percent of sales from 8.69% in fiscal 1998 to 8.67% in the fiscal year just ended. This represents the fourth consecutive year of overall expense improvement, which is particularly gratifying after considering the added burden of entering four new markets; opening new regional offices in the Midwest and Southeast; starting a complete new operating and merchandising team in Japan; incurring increased marketing and development expenses for the Executive Membership Program and launch of the American Express Co-Branded Card Program; and starting up our e-Commerce website—www.costco.com—which just completed its first year of operations this November. We will touch on each of these new programs further in this letter. Notwithstanding these added costs for growth, we clearly recognize our need to be continually improving our process of cost containment at every level of our business. We still have a lot of work to do in this area.

Before discussing our new member services and initiatives, we should highlight a few of the merchandising successes that were, in large part, responsible for the strength in sales growth both in fiscal 1999 and into the new 2000 fiscal year.

As you all know, we are first and foremost a merchandising Company. We are confident that we understand how to buy and sell goods as well as anyone in the world. Our merchants know how to find the right merchandise, at the right time, and at the right price; and our operators understand how to run the businesses that profitably deliver these values to our members. In addition to our primary merchandising focus of bringing branded goods to market at the lowest possible price, our buyers have over the past five years developed more than 400 items in a variety of categories under our own ‘‘Kirkland Signature’’ private label. Our private label strategy is simple and straightforward: **The item quality must be as good as, or better than, the leading national brand; and the value must be at least 20% better.** Today we estimate that approximately 12% of our nearly $30 billion in annual sales are sold under the ‘‘Kirkland Signature’’ name—a name that has become known for both high quality and great value. Private label successes in fiscal 1999 include co-branded Whirlpool appliances, co-branded chicken products with both Tyson and Foster Farms, and ‘‘Kirkland Signature’’ men’s and women’s cashmere sweaters. These are just a few examples of how we have expanded and enhanced the Costco brand name. Additionally, we continue to grow our pharmacy operations, which this year should top $1 billion in sales; and we expect to add 50 new gas stations to the 67 we operated at the beginning of fiscal year 2000. These two businesses, along with our very successful optical shops, one-hour photo labs, food courts and hearing aid centers have become a vital part of Costco’s appeal to its members and have created a discerning distinction between Costco and its competitors.

We continue to experiment with new member services for our Executive Members, and we now have in excess of 135,000 paid members in this program. We are confident that we are on the right track and that our Executive Member rolls will show substantial increases over the next several years. Overall, Costco membership rolls now include nearly four million Business Members and ten million Gold Star Members; and including Business Add-on cards and free spouse cards, over 30 million people in North America now carry a Costco card. Equally important, our members remain loyal to our business by renewing at a rate of 86% annually, which is the highest renewal rate ever achieved in our Company’s history.

Just before fiscal year-end, we announced a major alliance with American Express Company, whereby we would immediately begin accepting American Express cards in all U.S. Costco locations, and shortly thereafter jointly introduce two new co-branded cards. Just last month, the two co-branded cards were introduced, which bring unique features and benefits to our members. The consumer card is an American Express ‘‘fee-free’’ credit card (you still must pay for the Costco membership) that provides the cardholder with an annual rebate reward on all purchases made on the card—both at Costco and elsewhere—with the reward coupon redeemable at Costco. The business card is also an American Express ‘‘fee-free’’ charge card. In a ‘‘first’’ for American Express, these two co-branded cards will also serve as Costco membership cards with Costco membership information (including the member’s picture) on the back of the card. An agreement was announced just last month to offer a similar program to our more than 2.4 million members in Canada. 

We and American Express are both very excited about our new partnership. We believe American Express is a fantastic company, with similar customer philosophies to Costco; a great degree of member/customer loyalty; and overall, an upscale consumer and small business focus. We believe that the card acceptance and co-branded card issuance are the first of many unique and strategic business opportunities that will benefit both Costco and American Express, along with the millions of members and cardholders of our two companies. 

Costco’s e-Commerce site—www.costco.com—anniversaried on November 2nd, and we are very enthusiastic with our progress to date. We have a high quality website that has consistently received high marks for content and ease of use. We currently have over one million members registered with our site and expect that number will exceed two million by the Spring of 2000. Additionally, our special arrangement with Microsoft for unlimited internet access via MSN/Costco at a 40% discount (currently $11.99 a month paid in three-month intervals) affords us the unique position as a retailer to offer a high speed internet portal site, at a great savings, to our members. Costco is committed to capturing the potential of this business, and we will not let this potential bypass us.

As evidence of the importance we place on Executive Membership, the Costco/American Express relationship and e-Commerce, we have recently named Paul Moulton to the position of Executive Vice President in charge of these Special Member Service areas. Paul has been with Costco for 14 years in a variety of positions…from Warehouse Manager, to Vice President—Treasurer, to Senior Vice President—UK Operations, to Senior Vice President—Asian Operations to Senior Vice President—Information Systems. Working with Paul are Bob Craves, Senior Vice President—e-Commerce, Publishing and Community Giving and Court Newberry, Senior Vice President—Marketing and Member Services. Both Bob and Court were part of the founding management team at Costco and, along with Paul, will assure strong leadership and focus in developing these valuable programs for Costco.

In summary, we firmly believe that our business is on course to show further growth for years to come. As always, we thank our 70,000 fellow employees who make all the good things happen. We are grateful not only for their hard work and dedication, but also for the loyalty they exhibit by staying with our Company despite being the targets of all our competitors. We believe that, together, we have created a truly valuable brand in the Costco name, a brand that we are committed to continually enhancing in the eyes of our member customers, our vendors and you, our shareholders.

We appreciate your support as a Costco shareholder and Costco Member. We hope we will see you at our annual meeting on January 27th in Bellevue, Washington.

Cordially, 

Jeff Brotman, Chairman of the Board
Jim Sinegal, President & CEO