# Costco Annual Letter 2014

**Dear Costco Shareholders,**

Fiscal 2014 was a great year for Costco! For the fifth consecutive year, sales and profits increased to record levels. Sales exceeded USD 110 billion, and net income totaled USD 2.06 billion, or USD 4.65 per share. Our cash flow was strong; and over USD 900 million was returned to shareholders in the form of dividends ( USD 584 million) and share repurchases (USD 334 million). Significantly, these results were achieved in an increasingly competitive retail environment. We remain optimistic about Costco’s future and continue to invest heavily in growing our businesses in the U.S. and around the world.

We believe the disciplined execution of our unique business model – continually providing goods and services at the lowest prices – drove the Company’s strong financial and operating performance, and created additional opportunities for profitable future growth. Our members’ loyalty – as measured by renewal rates and shopping frequency – continues to reach record levels. Our U.S. and Canadian members renewed at a 91% rate; and worldwide our renewal rates topped 87%. Members shopped our warehouses an average of four percent more often than last year, driving a comparable sales increase of six percent, when excluding the negative impacts of gasoline price deflation and weaker foreign exchange rates. 

The average annualized sales of the thirty new warehouses opened during the year was our highest ever – coming in at $108 million per location. Average annual sales of all (663) warehouses also reached an all-time high – at $164 million per warehouse; and 165 locations generated annual sales greater than $200 million. Of these, 60 warehouses exceeded $250 million in annual sales – including two with sales in excess of $400 million! 

Great merchandise at exceptional prices is what our members around the world expect to find at Costco. To that end, we continue to expand our selection of brand-name merchandise offerings, as well as additional private label Kirkland Signature items. Our suppliers are our partners in business, and we continually seek to add new brands to our ranks. This year we added products from Cole Haan Outerwear, Rachel Zoe, and a range of Apple products. We expanded our offerings of organic products, keeping pace with the movement toward healthier lifestyles, which generated sales of nearly $3 billion. Natural and gluten-free foods are also selectively being added to our merchandise mix.

The success of our private label Kirkland Signature products continues in both our domestic and international markets, and now approximates 25% of our global sales. Some key Kirkland Signature introductions this year were in our apparel department – men’s khaki and five-pocket pants, and a ladies soft shell top. Several new food items were also introduced, including microwave popcorn, chunk light tuna, organic lemonade, organic honey, organic strawberries, and lactose-free milk.

Our gasoline business continues to expand, with almost all new U.S. and Canadian warehouses opening with gasoline stations; and we've added gasoline operations in Australia (three locations) and the U.K. (one location), with more international locations planned. In the U.S. and Canada we introduced our Kirkland Signature gasoline, which exceeds the TOP TIER™ performance standards. Gasoline sales were in excess of $11 billion in 2014; with an increase in profits despite a very volatile market. We believe our gasoline operations not only provide our members with an exceptional value proposition, but also represent another factor driving “in-store” shopping frequency. 

Our pharmacy, optical and hearing aid departments all recorded increases in sales and profits in 2014; and provided our members with great quality and savings on a variety of health and wellness products and services. Our pharmacies again received recognition for low prescription prices – in many cases at a fraction of our competitors’ prices. We also continued to expand our selection of over-the-counter products, including several Kirkland Signature items. Our optical department once more received acclaim for its exceptional service, selection and prices; and, in our hearing aid department, sales and profits were bolstered by the success of our Kirkland Signature premium digital hearing aids, with great prices on state-of-the-art products. 

Our e-commerce business grew close to 20% in 2014, to nearly $3 billion in sales. Our Mexico website went live in 2014, adding to our online sites in the U.S., Canada and the U.K. We plan to continue the expansion of our e-commerce business into other countries where we have operations. The lines between online and brick-and-mortar stores are blurring as multichannel retail is evolving as part of the everyday retail environment. Many of our members are well-traveled digital shoppers who research product features, check official reviews and conduct price comparisons online with the use of computers, tablets and mobile devices. We see this as both a challenge and an opportunity, and continue to seek ways to enhance our website and mobile applications to better meet the needs of our members. This year we improved the navigation, checkout performance and search engine optimization of our web sites. We also relaunched our mobile site and apps for smartphones and tablets; and integrated several of our inline and online buying teams to better leverage our combined buying power, get more key brands online, expand our item selection, and provide even greater value to our members. Additional online capabilities are also being evaluated. For example, we are partnering with Google Express in several markets to test delivery of online orders; and we are working with Alibaba, on their Tmall site, to provide Costco merchandise to online shoppers in China.

Our seventy-six million loyal Costco cardholders are the key to our success; and their satisfaction with the merchandise they buy and the service they receive with every shopping experience is our constant goal. Membership revenue increased over six percent in 2014 with strong sign-ups at our new openings, particularly in Asia and Australia. The growth in our Executive membership base this past year was particularly satisfying. With strong sign-ups and upgrades, Executive Members now account for more than one-third of our memberships, and almost two-thirds of our sales.

Over the last few years we have made significant investments to modernize and enhance our information systems. This is an extensive multi-year effort to replace and/or upgrade our legacy systems and infrastructure to support our future growth. While this investment increased our SG&A (selling, general and administrative) expenses in 2014, and will continue to impact SG&A, we expect long-term benefits in many areas of our business, with increased efficiencies in a number of our day-to-day operations.

During 2014 we opened thirty new Costco warehouses: seventeen in the U.S., including our first openings in South Dakota and Louisiana (we’re now in forty-three states), and thirteen in our international markets, ending fiscal 2014 with 663 locations in operation worldwide. These openings increased our warehouse square footage by five percent to over 95 million square feet. International openings continued our global expansion with new warehouses in seven countries: Mexico (Monterrey III), Canada (St. Albert, Alberta; Central Mississauga, Ontario; and Guelph, Ontario); Australia (Ringwood, Crossroads, and North Lakes); Japan (Hitachinaka and Izumi); Korea (Euijeongbu and Cheonan); the United Kingdom (Hayes, England); as well as our first warehouse in Seville, Spain.

We are already four months into fiscal 2015 and our current plan is to open up to thirty-four new warehouses (including three relocations), which will increase our total warehouse square footage another five percent. Planned openings include twenty in the U.S.; four in Mexico; three in Japan; two each in Australia and Korea; and one each in Canada, the U.K. and Taiwan. In the run-up to this year’s holiday season, we have opened nine of these new warehouses, including one relocation. 

As we continue to grow our global business, we remain mindful of both the opportunity and the responsibility to conduct our business in a sustainable manner. Our commitment to the sustainable construction and operation of our facilities encompasses many activities: enhancing our warehouse energy management systems; expanding our packaging design initiatives; and further developing our recycling and waste stream management systems. For example, we’re now operating rooftop solar photovoltaic systems in 83 of our warehouses, which are projected to generate 72 million kWh of electricity per year. We have further reduced the amount of waste we send to landfills through the use of additional recycling and composting measures; and have expanded the grease recovery systems in our rotisserie chicken operations.

Another aspect of sustainability is the strategic management of procuring items – Kirkland Signature as well as other international brands – to meet the needs of our projected growth, domestically and internationally. We are partnering with key suppliers in over 60 countries worldwide to evaluate and plan for the continued availability of exceptional merchandise in the coming years. 

Involvement in and support for the communities where our employees live and work is an integral part of our company’s identity. United Way, Children’s Miracle Network Hospitals, Communities in Schools and the Costco Scholarship Fund are just a few of the organizations we support. Our efforts are enhanced and multiplied many times over with the collaboration of our members, employees and suppliers. 

We look forward with confidence to the challenges and opportunities of 2015 and beyond. We are confident that our management team, working with our 195,000 employees, will continue to embrace our corporate culture and fulfill our mission of providing quality goods and services at the lowest prices. It is only through the concentrated efforts and the constant focus on our mission and core values that Costco is able to succeed year after year. We want to surprise and delight our members, while balancing our mix of limited SKUs based on the wants and needs of our global member. We concentrate on efficiency and cost control at every level of our operations, working to keep our overhead low while still offering our employees the best wage and benefit package in the retail industry. And we never lose sight of our commitment to our stakeholders – providing our members with exceptional products and services, taking care of our employees, partnering with our suppliers, and rewarding our shareholders – not just for today, but for the long term. 

As always, we extend our best wishes to you and your families for a joyous holiday season and a healthy, happy and prosperous New Year,

Jeff Brotman
Craig Jelinek