# Costco Annual Letter 2004

**Dear Costco Shareholders: **

Fiscal 2004 was an exciting year for Costco, where we were able to show solid growth, not only in our merchandising and sales efforts, but also substantial progress in operational controls, which when combined, resulted in an improved bottom line. After three years of rapid expansion into many new markets; a rising cost structure, associated not only with this expansion, but also with highly inflationary healthcare and workers’ compensation expenses; and earnings growth of just under 5% per year during that period, we are pleased to report that fiscal 2004 was a banner year for Costco, highlighted by record sales and earnings! Most of the Company’s fiscal 2004 financial goals were met or exceeded; and in addition to record sales and profits, we grew and strengthened our membership base; leveraged our strong sales results to reduce our operating expense percentages; expanded our operations worldwide with 23 new warehouse openings; and declared our first quarterly cash dividend. We achieved these results by focusing on what we do best—fulfilling our corporate mission and sticking to our game plan. 

Our 2004 fiscal year ended August 29th, with net sales of $47.1 billion, an increase of 13% over 2003’s $41.7 billion. On a comparable warehouse basis, comparing sales of buildings that had been open at least a year, our sales were up 10% in 2004, double our 2003 increase of 5%. We also increased our gross margin in 2004, bringing it up to 10.72%, from 10.69% in 2003. Equally important, after four years of increasing operating expense percentages, we reduced our expense ratio from 9.83% in 2003 to 9.75% in 2004, an improvement of eight basis points as a percentage of sales. These are trends that we hope will continue. 

Costco is now the fifth largest retailer in the United States and the 11th largest in the world, standing at number 29 in the Fortune 500. We finished fiscal 2004 with 441 warehouses operating in 36 U.S. states, Puerto Rico and seven countries. **Typically, our per unit sales are nearly double those of our nearest competitor**. In fiscal 2004, our average annual sales per warehouse were $115 million, up from $105 million in 2003. For U.S. buildings, the 2004 average was $121 million. We are committed to continue driving higher levels of sales by doing what we do best—being the most innovative merchant and providing our members the best merchandise and services at the lowest overall prices. 

Our ongoing goal of increasing shareholder value is accomplished by conscientiously living our mission statement and code of ethics each and every day… To bring the highest quality goods and services to market at the lowest possible prices… and to obey the law, take care of our members, take care of our employees, respect our suppliers and reward our shareholders.

As Costco’s founders, we take personal pride in the highly ethical way Costco conducts business—day in and day out. Throughout our 21 years in business, we have come to be viewed as the Company that has achieved unquestioned “pricing and value authority”—a position we have earned and that we value. We assure you that we will continue to work hard to maintain that reputation. Our priorities demand that we continue to delight our members every day. We want each shopping experience to be the best in terms of quality, value and service— and we want it to be fun. We strive to keep an undercurrent of excitement in our buildings, where our members can shop with the anticipation of finding unexpected treasures, while purchasing their everyday needs with the assurance they have received the best value—price and quality—available. This past year, we increased our staffing at the front-end registers, expediting the checkout process and enhancing our members’ overall shopping experience, leading, we believe, to more frequent shops and higher sales with minimal increases in expense. 

We continued our expansion in fiscal 2004, opening 23 new warehouses, including three new warehouses in our Mexico joint venture. Most of these new locations were added to existing markets, improving our accessibility and service to our members. Experience has taught us that our strong markets can successfully support many additional Costco warehouses. In fact, our results consistently show that existing locations profit from “in-filling,” bringing us a significantly higher return on investment in a shorter period of time than is common in new markets. Accordingly, we will increasingly tailor our growth plans to reflect a majority of new Costco buildings in existing markets, most likely resulting in more than two-thirds of our openings being located in existing “in-fill” markets, rather than new markets.

Opening day sales for most of our new locations were extraordinarily high this year, some breaking previous records set by some of our most successful buildings. In the United States, our new-market buildings were in Hoover, Alabama; El Paso, Texas; Myrtle Beach, South Carolina and Greensboro, North Carolina. Our infill buildings were opened in Commerce Township, Michigan; Chantilly and Leesburg, Virginia; Citrus Heights, Turlock and Poway, California; South Ogden, Utah; Coeur d’Alene, Idaho; Vancouver, Washington; Lewisville, Texas; Enfield, Connecticut and Lake in the Hills, Illinois. We also opened our fifth Business Center in Fife, Washington. 

The demand for American goods remains high around the world, fueling our international expansion. Two of our three new warehouses in Mexico were in new markets (Cuernavaca and Cabo San Lucas), while adding one in our existing high-volume market of Tijuana. Also, as we discussed at our last two shareholders’ meetings, we opened Muros Cultural Center in Cuernavaca, Mexico, a stunning facility that houses the world-famous Jacques and Natasha Gelman Collection of Modern and Contemporary Mexican Art, along with the restored murals of Casino de la Selva. In Canada, we added two new in-fill buildings (Terrebonne, Quebec and London, Ontario). We feel we have only begun to tap the potential of the international marketplace for Costco, and we look forward to continued global expansion and success. So far in our Fiscal 2005 first quarter, we added our fifth Costco in Japan; and we are preparing for a spring opening in Bristol, England, which will bring our total to sixteen Costcos in the United Kingdom.

In fiscal 2005, we plan to open 22 to 25 additional new warehouses and relocate seven existing locations. Eleven of these (including three relocations) will be operating before calendar year-end, bringing our total warehouses at the end of calendar 2004 to 449. Buildings opened in the Fall of 2004 were widespread geographically: one in Illinois; one in Arizona; one in Minnesota; one in Iowa; two in Michigan; one in Mexico; and, as mentioned above, one in Japan. We believe the market is far from saturated. In fact, we feel confident that given recent successes and market conditions, we should be able to double our present number of warehouses over the next ten years, given the combination of U.S. and international opportunities. 

We continue to look at other types of businesses that fit well within the Costco model. In fact, in October 2004 we opened our second Costco Home location adjacent to a high-volume Costco warehouse in Tempe, Arizona. Our first Costco Home, featuring high-end furniture and accessories, has been profitable since opening in December 2002, despite its “stand-alone” location in Kirkland, Washington. We feel the highly visible location of our new facility will draw additional traffic, thanks to its proximity to the Tempe warehouse, perhaps giving us a model to build on for future expansion of this business in markets where we have multiple Costco warehouses and hundreds of thousands of loyal Costco members. Our strategy, as we have mentioned before, is two-fold—first, make it more attractive to be a Costco member; and second, learn something in these businesses that will make all of our 449 Costcos better. 

The high quality and value we offer in our ancillary businesses continue to set us apart from our competition and bring our members in for additional shops, increasing incremental sales. Our 211 gas stations brought in sales of $2.3 billion in 2004, an increase of 45% over 2003. We have a well-earned reputation of being the best-priced pharmacy in every U.S. market in which we operate. Last year, we filled 18 million prescriptions and had sales of $2.2 billion, an increase of 11% over 2003. Our food courts sold more than fifty million hot dog and soda combinations in 2004, with our giant Kosher dogs regularly being named “Best Hot Dog” in local competitions across the country. And our Optical, 1-Hour Photo and Hearing Aid centers are thriving operations and all showed double-digit gains last year. 

Our E-commerce business, at costco.com, continues to grow exponentially, and last year had sales of over $375 million, an increase of 66% over the prior year. As much as costco.com has grown, we believe we have barely touched the surface of this format, and forecast continued significant growth and leadership in the Ecommerce industry. Over the next several years we believe that costco.com, our “virtual warehouse,” can become a $5 billion business, helping us to leverage our existing relationships with suppliers, as well as expand our membership base.


The initial rollout this past year of E-commerce order stations in our buildings brings costco.com to our warehouse shoppers and enhances our top-notch, special-order kiosk offerings. While saving money on the basics, our members can choose from a wide variety of value-priced luxury items, whether found while treasurehunting the aisles or in special-order kiosks or at our upscale road shows within our warehouses. 

As you may know, Costco is one of the largest dealers of fine diamonds in the country, with over 67,000 carats sold this past fiscal year. Likewise, the value we provide in fine wines is unparalleled. In fact, we have recently expanded our fine wine offering by developing our own Kirkland Signature wine—a full-bodied Shiraz from Australia’s Barossa Valley—complementing our earlier successes with Kirkland Signature Chardonnay and Cabernet Sauvignon. As with all of our private label Kirkland Signature products, it represents the highest quality and best value available.

Our reputation is solidly built on our underlying philosophy of carrying the highest quality national brands at the lowest possible prices; and even as we expand our Kirkland Signature private label, we continue to develop relationships with new merchandise suppliers. Our suppliers are our partners in business, and we believe in establishing alliances with them that enable both of us to prosper. We recently built new direct relationships with Kitchen Aid, Osh Kosh, Sony Computers, Sony TVs, Godiva, Pioneer, Lane Furniture, Royal Sateen, Samsung, Levi’s, and FILA. We also have co-brands with Starbucks, Hanes, Foster Farms, Mariani’s, Jelly Bellies, Tyson, DeLacre, Newman’s and Hanson’s. 

All of these merchandise strategies are designed to help us give our members the highest quality and best values in the marketplace. Exceeding our members’ expectations is our constant goal. We currently have 23.4 million loyal member households, representing 42.4 million Costco cardholders. Member renewals are strong, running 86% for our membership overall, and 93% for Executive Members. We now have 3.1 million Executive Members in the U.S. and Canada, who pay $100 a year to take advantage of some 23 Executive Member services Costco now offers, while receiving a 2% Executive Member reward on their qualified purchases. We have found that these are our best customers—members who spend higher average amounts and increase their spending each year. 


Of course, as proud as we are of Costco’s achievements in fiscal 2004, we realize that the Company’s bottom line is also very important to you, our shareholders. We have worked hard throughout our Company’s history to control expenses; and we are extremely pleased to say that, thanks to the success of several initiatives begun last year, we believe we have made some lasting improvements that will serve the dual purpose of better expense ratios and improved service to our Costco members.

As you know, we made changes to our health care plans that went into effect in October 2003—changes designed to bring a balance between rising health care costs and the need to educate our employees on how to be better health care consumers. Our new plans are expected to increase the percentage employees contribute from 4% to 8% over a four-year period. We have already seen a cost improvement in this area. Nevertheless, our employee benefits are still the best in our industry, and we will ensure that they remain so.

Our current expansion plans, while still aggressive, should not interfere with our cost-cutting initiatives. We saw expense improvements in 2004, and we expect more in 2005. Additionally, while we believe Costco has the lowest inventory shrinkage rate in retail, we felt we could do better; and this year we reduced it even further, achieving the best results in the Company’s history. By challenging everything we do, we also lowered our operating expense ratios in our home and regional offices in 2004, and we continue to hold the line on utility costs. Costco was built on cost-saving efficiencies, and we are committed to continually reducing costs wherever we can through innovative problem-solving.

A big part of our success stems from our creative and cohesive management team, many of whom have been working together for more than 20 years at Costco, and for up to 40 years in retail. They are, we believe, the strongest team in the industry and are highly sought after. We are also aggressively developing new leaders within Costco’s employee base, and we have a new generation primed and ready to assume management roles as we expand our business.

This year saw a realignment of some of our executive officers. Franz Lazarus, Executive Vice President of International Operations and a senior executive with the Company since its inception, recently retired. We appreciate the many contributions Franz has made over the years to the success of the Company, and we will certainly miss him. Replacing Franz are Jim Murphy, formerly Senior Vice President of our United Kingdom operations, who has assumed leadership of our International Division, and Richard Chavez, formerly Senior Vice President of our Asia operations, who is now head of our Manufacturing and Other Businesses Division.

Dick DiCerchio, Senior Executive Vice President, COO, Merchandising, has assumed leadership over all Costco warehouse operations in the United States and around the world. Craig Jelinek, previously Executive Vice President, COO, Northern Division and Midwest Region Operations, is now responsible for all Costco Merchandising. Doug Schutt, who had been Senior Vice President of E-commerce and Special Order Merchandise, was promoted to Executive Vice President, COO, Northern Division and Midwest Region; and Tom Walker, Senior Vice President of Construction and Distribution, was also promoted to Executive Vice President. Ginnie Roeglin, Senior Vice President, was promoted to head up our important E-commerce business. All of these changes work to strengthen our management team. 

In October of this year, we were pleased to add Susan Decker to our Board of Directors. Ms. Decker is the Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President of Finance and Administration for Yahoo! Inc. Her breadth of experience—including 12 years in equity research and 4 years at Yahoo! Inc.—will be an asset to our Company, and we are fortunate and delighted to have her with Costco. 

Costco remains the dominant membership warehouse club operator in the world, setting the standard for excellence and leading the industry in sales increases. Our momentum is strong in terms of both sales and earnings, and we stand on a firm financial base. We are committed to growth, both domestically and abroad; and we have the strong, cohesive organization and talented management staff necessary to successfully do so. 

We’d like to thank our management team and our employees, all 110,000 of them, for their exceptional performance this past year. Their energy, dedication and ongoing efforts to continually exceed the expectations of our members, our suppliers and our communities ensure that as a company we are all doing our best for you, our shareholders. 

The mettle of a great company is measured by its long-term performance, the quality of its organization, the integrity of its people and the attention paid to all of its stakeholders; as well as its ability to creatively rise above adversity. Together, we can be proud that Costco exemplifies such strengths, and that they can be seen in our 2004 achievements: record sales and profits, new cost-savings initiatives and reduced SG&A, expanded operations, creative merchandising, a loyal and growing membership base, a strengthened balance sheet, and a respected business reputation. 

We assure you that our management team is not complacent, and despite our successes of this past year, we know there is plenty of work left to be done. Costco has hundreds of opportunities to improve. In the future our Company can do much more to delight our customers; to be a better employer; to make the communities we serve proud; and, as a result, provide greater rewards for our shareholders. These goals remain our constant focus. 

Costco is poised for more long-term growth and success—success that you will share as we continue to increase our profitability and shareholder value. We look forward to discussing our plans for Costco’s future with you at our Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 27, 2005, in Bellevue, Washington. Thank you for your continued confidence and support. We wish you and yours a most joyous Holiday Season and a New Year abundant in success, good health and happiness.

Cordially,

Jeff Brotman
Jim Sinegal

