# Costco Annual Letter 2010

**Dear Costco Shareholders,**

We are pleased to report our fiscal 2010 results and discuss with you our outlook for fiscal 2011 and beyond. Clearly, the past two years have signaled unparalleled challenges for all of us in the business world; but 2010 provided somewhat of a comeback for Costco. Despite the fragile economic conditions in many of our key markets, most notably California, Arizona, Nevada, Florida and the United Kingdom, 2010 produced a record year for Costco in terms of sales and earnings.

We achieved sales of $76.3 billion in 2010, an increase of nine percent from last year’s $69.9 billion; and comparable sales in warehouses open more than a year were up seven percent. Costco’s net earnings for fiscal 2010 exceeded $1.3 billion; and our earnings per share (EPS) increased 18% over the prior year – to $2.92, also an all-time high. While our sales and earnings benefited from stronger foreign exchange rates in nearly all the countries in which we operate, particularly in Asia and Canada, as well as from inflation in the price of gasoline, we firmly believe that Costco is doing a lot of things right.

This is well illustrated in a recent survey in which more than 30,000 shoppers rated Costco as the most excellent value among America’s most popular retail chain stores. Our members constantly communicate that they love shopping at Costco. We continue to present great theatre and outstanding values packaged in a treasure hunt atmosphere, which we are convinced makes Costco a fun place to shop.

Even as the economy remained uncertain in 2010, our members shopped our warehouses an average of 4.3% more often and spent about 2.5% more on each visit than they did in 2009. Fifty-six of our warehouses exceeded $200 million in sales in fiscal 2010, and two of these units each did more than $300 million. This rate of revenues per building stands out in the retail industry and results from our ongoing focus on value – that combination of quality and price – that enforces our mission to delight our members by continually providing them with a wide range of quality goods and services at the lowest possible prices.

Costco entered the current recession in a very solid financial position. We have always had, and continue to have, a strong cash flow and healthy balance sheet. These enabled us to expend nearly $2 billion in fiscal 2010 for capital expenditures, quarterly dividend payments, and repurchases of our common stock.

In fiscal 2010 we spent nearly $1.1 billion for capital expenditures – for the construction and opening of new warehouses and depots, as well as renovations to a number of our existing buildings. Costco will end calendar year 2010 with 582 warehouses in operation around the world: 425 in the United States and Puerto Rico, 80 in Canada, 22 in the United Kingdom, 32 in Mexico, nine in Japan, seven in Korea, six in Taiwan and one in Australia. The demand for Costco quality goods remains strong all over the globe, and we have established an ambitious goal of growing to more than a thousand warehouses world-wide over the next ten to twelve years. In addition to infills and expansion in the countries in which we currently operate, we are evaluating additional countries for future openings.

We opened 14 new units in fiscal 2010, compared with 20 in 2009 and 25 in 2008. All of the 2010 openings were infill buildings in existing U.S. and Canadian markets and included two relocations: Warrenton, Oregon, which went from a small-sized Costco (72,000 square feet) to a full-size building (139,000 square feet); and Redwood City, California, an on-site relocation, replacing an aging facility and adding a gas station. Other fiscal 2010 warehouse openings included: Paradise Valley, Arizona; Colorado Springs West, Colorado; Manchester, Missouri; Strongsville, Ohio; Hayward and Pacoima, California; Saint John, New Brunswick; Manhattan and Rego Park, New York; Roseburg, Oregon; Coventry, England; and Okotoks, Alberta. Eight of these new warehouses had opening day sales in excess of $500,000, and three of them brought in sums approaching a million dollars. While the number of openings this past year was small, their average annualized sales exceeded $94 million per building.

In the run-up to this year’s holiday season, we also opened ten new units this Fall in our new fiscal year 2011, in the following communities: a San Diego, California Business Center; and traditional Costco warehouses in Rocky View, Alberta; Woodmore, Maryland; Ft. Oglethorpe and Brookhaven, Georgia; Melrose Park, Bolingbrook and Mettawa, Illinois; Burnsville, Minnesota; and East Vancouver, Washington. We anticipate opening an additional 16 to 18 new warehouses prior to the end of fiscal 2011, bringing the potential total openings for fiscal 2011 to 28. Most of these are also infill buildings, and include units in the U.S., Canada, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, Korea, and England. We have been very busy reviewing potential sites and securing new properties during the economic downturn and have a large pipeline of promising new locations to be developed over the next few years.

In mid-2010 we increased our annual dividend to shareholders by 14%, to $.82 per share. We also bought back nearly 10 million shares at a cost of $568 million. Since inception of our stock buy-back program in 2005, we have bought back nearly 100 million shares of Costco stock (almost 20% of the common shares outstanding) at an average price of $54.39.

Costco is currently the third largest retailer in the United States and the eighth largest retailer in the world. We are the 25th largest company in the Fortune 500, and we feel confident in our potential for future growth opportunities. One of our many strengths is our strong entrepreneurial culture that encourages our employees and management teams to be creative and contribute new ideas. This gives us the opportunity to be a company that adheres to its primary focus and game plan while also constantly evolving and improving. This winning combination brought us successfully through another demanding year of challenges for retail businesses. Fiscal 2010 brought a stalled economy, continued softness in high-ticket and discretionary item purchases, and rising health care costs. Nevertheless, we believe Costco’s extraordinary culture made us well-qualified to build market share in these tough times, and that is exactly what we continue to do.

We believe that the Costco management team is the strongest and most cohesive in the industry, composed primarily of people who grew up in the retail business and who have worked together for decades. Most have worked in a variety of positions, at various functions and managerial levels within our Company, making them well-versed in many aspects of our business. All of our senior executives average over 25 years experience with Costco; and that helps us remain true to our core objectives. This also gives us a remarkable talent pool of highly qualified and talented management. Be assured that as some members of our original executive team near retirement, we have an outstanding and experienced group of executives poised and ready to take on additional responsibilities. Our entire executive management team helps ensure continuity of leadership and has been very successful in developing leaders for the future of Costco.

This year we had a few changes at the executive level. In March, we handed the presidential reins over to Craig Jelinek, a highly seasoned retail executive with 35 years experience in the industry, 26 of them serving in various high-level positions at Costco, most recently as Executive Vice President, Chief Merchandising Officer. Craig is President and Chief Operating Officer, and also joined the Company’s Board of Directors. Doug Schutt, formerly Executive Vice President, Northern and Midwest Operations, has returned to his merchandising roots as Executive Vice President, Chief Merchandising Officer. Additionally, Dick DiCerchio, Senior Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, retired in June after serving 27 years in senior management positions within the Company. Dick was part of our original management team and has contributed extensively in virtually all aspects of the innovation and growth of Costco since its beginning. We are deeply indebted to Dick for his insights and leadership; he will be sorely missed.

Our Company focus remains unchanged as we continue to be the dominant warehouse club operator, with over 60 million loyal members. Bolstered by a strong member renewal rate (over 87%) and an expanding Executive Membership base, our membership fee revenue totaled nearly $1.7 billion in 2010. Our Executive Membership program (which represents approximately one-third of our total membership base) is so important because it strengthens our bond with our highest-volume members. Executive members shop more frequently and spend more each trip than our Gold Star members.

At its core, Costco is a company of exceptional merchants and operators, and it is our dedication to the efficient sourcing, shipping, displaying and selling of quality goods and services that makes Costco the company that it is today. We are constantly monitoring the unique qualities of each country where we operate, capitalizing on opportunities, adjusting and enhancing our product mix, and adding new items. Our merchandise suppliers are our partners in business, and we continually seek to add top quality vendors to our ranks. We have recently established direct relationships with Nautilus, O’Neill (children’s and men’s apparel), Hansgrohe, Petit Bateau, Rosetta Stone, Gucci watches, and Bose, along with several others.

While continuing to highlight and add to the national brands we carry, our Kirkland Signature brand is an increasingly important adjunct to our product mix and enhances member loyalty. Introduced in 1992, today it represents 15% of our items and 20% of our sales. We have many Kirkland Signature items in each of our merchandise categories, and believe we have the capability of eventually building our sales penetration of Kirkland Signature products to approximately 30%. Do not interpret this to be an abandonment of the quality brand name products we provide to our members – these will always be a major element of our product selection.

Our extensive cross-dock depot system enables us to increase efficiencies of merchandise handling and distribution and significantly reduces the net landed cost of an item at the warehouse. We now have depots in almost all of our countries, and in fiscal 2010 over seventy percent of our goods in North America went through one of our 34 depots, with a total volume approaching $50 billion. Our depot system is the key element of our supply chain, and is unmatched in providing cost-effective and nimble distribution everywhere we operate.

There are many aspects to keeping overhead costs low in a company the size of Costco, and we work diligently at all of them all of the time. Controlling operating costs (SG&A) is a constant focus for us, and we are pleased that these expenses as a percent of sales decreased in 2010 after an increase in 2009 (which reflected rising costs, particularly in health care benefits). We will continue to emphasize cost controls and expense reduction in 2011. This is an area of our business with which we are not satisfied and one that requires much improvement.

Our inventory shrink results continued at an all-time low in 2010 – at less than 15 basis points of sales. Also, reducing the costs of merchandise returns has been a focus for some time, and we continue to see positive results from the policies we implemented a few years ago. These costs reached a six-year low in 2010; and we believe we have achieved a good balance between our return policy and member satisfaction.

While Costco does not enter “competitions”, we are nevertheless very proud when we are singled out for recognition; and this year we received a number of accolades. Among them was the naming of Costco as the 21st most admired and respected company in the world by Fortune Magazine – one of only two retailers to make the top 25.

When we look back over the last decade and consider all the many innovations and successes that we have had at Costco, we give credit to our employees for their vision and hard work that took innovative ideas and made them into realities. Many of the products and services that drive our sales today were either non-existent or in their infancy at the beginning of the decade, and it is exciting to consider where we will go in the next ten years. For example, we began our e-commerce business (costco.com) in November 1998 with a limited offering of products. Since then we have developed e-commerce into a thriving operation that carries around 4,000 skus, complements our warehouse offerings and drives sales in both environments. Our performance picked up in 2010 after a slight reduction in sales in 2009, and we showed particularly strong growth in Canada (costco.ca). Our total e-commerce operations realized nearly $2 billion in sales and a 15% increase in profits in fiscal 2010. Within the next 10 years we look to expand this business on a global scale and envision great potential for sales and profit growth. 

Our warehouse ancillary businesses also continue to be strong performers. These operations not only set us apart from our competition, but also bring in substantial income and help drive incremental sales in our buildings. Encompassing our food courts, mini-photo labs, optical, hearing aid, pharmacy and gas station operations, many of these departments showed good sales and profit increases in 2010. Increases in gas prices, for example, helped us realize a 25% increase in gasoline sales, which came in at just over $6 billion. Our dollar-fifty hot dog and soda combination still reigns supreme in our food courts, generating sales of more than $140 million world-wide in 2010. Our pharmacies continue to be acclaimed around the country for their low prescription prices. We now have pharmacies in 513 locations, which generated sales of over $3.6 billion last year, an increase of ten percent, and increased profits as well, thanks in part to the efficiencies of our three central fill facilities that service most of our West Coast warehouses and reduce the cost of a prescription renewal by almost half. Additional central fill locations are in our long-range plans.

We are cautiously optimistic about the economic outlook – and our business – for 2011. We know will have to work harder than ever to continue our success. We enter the second decade of the 21st century poised to expand our operations, increase our sales, reduce our costs, and continue to lead our industry while rewarding you, our shareholders. We will accomplish these goals by doing what we have always done – concentrate on our mission to continually bring quality goods and services to our members at the lowest possible prices, while being responsible corporate citizens, taking care of our members and our employees, and respecting our vendors. We are in business for the long haul, and we are committed to continually building a company that will be here fifty, sixty and more years from now. We owe that to our shareholders, our members, our employees, and our suppliers. 

We appreciate the trust you have placed in our management team, and on behalf of our 150,000 employees around the world, we thank you for your support. Please join us in anticipating continued success in 2011. We hope to see many of you at our Annual Meeting of Shareholders on January 27, 2011, in Bellevue, Washington.

We wish you, your associates and your families joy and peace over the holiday season. May we all greet the new year with optimism for the future. 

Warm Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Jim Sinegal
Craig Jelinek