# Costco Annual Letter 2017

**Dear Costco Shareholders, **

Do the right thing. It is a philosophy embedded in our culture; one that was established and cultivated by our co-founders. Although we lost one of these great leaders this past year, members of our leadership team and beyond realize the key to long-term success is not high margins; rather it is how you treat, engage, and include people: our members, our employees and our suppliers alike. Thus our commitment to our core values will remain strong in Jeff Brotman’s legacy and we will continue to offer the highest quality and best value to our more than 90 million loyal members, who recognize our leadership in the market. By focusing on these values, we achieved another strong financial performance in fiscal 2017. Net sales for the 53-week fiscal year totaled $126.2 billion, an increase of nine percent from $116.1 billion in the 52-week 2016 fiscal year, with a comparable sales increase of four percent. Net income for the 53-week fiscal year was $2.68 billion, or $6.08 per share, compared to $2.35 billion, or $5.33 per share, in the 52-week prior year. Revenue from membership fees increased eight percent to $2.85 billion. 

Costco remains competitively strong in an ever-evolving retail environment, outpacing other retailers while maintaining our core values and member-focused initiatives. Despite a challenging retail climate, we continue to grow sales, add warehouses both domestically and abroad, and provide great value to our members. Costco buyers and operators work tirelessly to maintain low prices for our members on everyday items in our warehouses around the world, as well as on our e-commerce sites. Our Kirkland Signature brand is now recognized around the world, and is synonymous with high quality and great value. In 2017, Kirkland Signature sales exceeded $35 billion, as we expanded our offerings in apparel, sporting goods, fresh food and organic food items. Organics are a fast-growing category in both fresh and grocery, and our buyers are dedicated to growing the available selection. In certain merchandise initiatives centered on low prices, quality and sustainable merchandise, we have pursued increased vertical integration. We are currently under construction on a meat plant in Illinois, and we recently broke ground on a poultry plant in Nebraska. 

Since its inception, our business has been to grow our membership and drive the value proposition that keeps members returning to the warehouse. Improving sales, comps, and member shopping frequency reaffirm that brick-and-mortar continues to be strong. Yet we recognize that technology has changed the retail landscape, now enabling us to connect with our members through multiple channels. We strive to create an easy, efficient and engaging way for members to shop with us in our warehouses and online. Maintaining our commitment to providing exceptional service and value to our members when shopping online, improvements were made in merchandise offerings, site functionality, search capability, checkout, and delivery times. Additionally, two exciting online offerings were recently introduced with the launch of Costco Grocery, a two-day delivery on dry grocery items, and a same-day delivery offering both fresh and dry grocery items through partnering with Instacart. 

Since the June 2016 launch of our Costco Anywhere Visa Card by Citi, 1.8 million new member accounts (approximately 2.4 million new credit cards) were opened. The enhanced cash-back rewards include earning 4% on gas, 3% on restaurant, hotel and eligible travel, 2% at Costco and Costco.com, and 1% on all other purchases, exceeding our previous credit card offering. Executive Members using this card maximize value by additionally earning the Executive Member 2% Reward on qualified purchases. 

Among our highlights this year is Costco Travel, where we have expanded the offerings, providing even greater value to our members. Recently, we introduced hotel-only booking reservations. Costco Travel's rental car rates are consistently some of the lowest in the marketplace and are now available to members in Canada and the UK, extending Costco Travel’s international presence. Additionally, the annual 2% Reward now applies to Costco Travel purchases in the U.S. and Canada, further enhancing the value of Executive Membership.

In 2017, we identified additional opportunities to grow our core warehouse business globally, including the openings of 26 new warehouses. We expanded into two new countries, as we opened our first warehouses in Iceland and France; and we opened our first Business Center in Canada. In 2018, we expect to open 20-25 new warehouses and relocate up to six warehouses.

At Costco, we foster a climate of inclusion and diversity, as well as provide a positive work environment that encourages opportunities for growth and advancement to our employees globally. These initiatives, among others, result in a consistently efficient and loyal employee base, with one of the lowest turnover rates in the industry. In recognition, Costco was named in a survey published by Forbes as America's best large employer in 2017.

We continue to focus on sourcing our merchandise in a sustainable manner. Sustainability to us is remaining a profitable business while doing the right thing. We are committed to lessening our environmental impact, decreasing our carbon footprint, sourcing our products responsibly, and working with our suppliers, manufacturers, and farmers to preserve natural resources. This will remain at the forefront of our business practices; and more information can be found on our Costco.com website under "Sustainability Commitment."

In delivering greater and greater value to our members and striving to be generous to our employees, we have been able to drive stronger sales and earnings for our shareholders. Along with strong earnings growth, we have been able to generate cash flows greater than the funds required to expand and grow our business. These cash flows have allowed us to give back to our shareholders in the form of both dividends and share repurchases. In just the past five years, we have rewarded our shareholders with aggregate dividends of $26.61 per share, of which $19.00 related to three special dividends, translating to a dividend payout of $11.7 billion. In 2017 alone, $3.9 billion in dividends were paid out, including a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share. Additionally, stock buy-backs over the past five years totaled $1.8 billion of which $473 million related to 2017. 

Changes to our Board of Directors this year included the appointment of Hamilton (Tony) James, who has been a board member since 1988, to Chairman, and the addition of Ken Denman. Ken is a Venture Partner at Sway Ventures and former President and Chief Executive Officer of Emotient, Inc. He serves on several boards, and offers extensive knowledge in the areas of technology and communications. Retiring from our Board in January 2018 will be Dan Evans. Dan has been a director of the Company since January 2003, and we thank him for his 15 years of dedication and service.

Also retiring from the Costco Board next month will be Jim Sinegal. Jim, along with Jeff Brotman, co-founded Costco nearly 35 years ago; and ran Costco as President and CEO until just a few years ago. To say that Jim has been a mentor, a friend and an incredibly positive inspiration to literally thousands of Costco associates over these years is an understatement. His vision, his passion and his tireless work ethic have impacted so many; and paved the way for Costco’s philosophy and the values it represents to make Costco the great company it is today and will continue to be into the future. Thank you, Jim, for all you have done; and thank you for allowing me to be one of those lucky thousands that you mentored, befriended and inspired. 

As the year comes to a close, I extend my appreciation to the 239,000 employees and over 90 million members worldwide who help make Costco the undisputed leader in membership warehouse clubs. I thank you for your continued trust in and support of Costco, and wish you and your families a joyous holiday season, and a happy, healthy, and prosperous New Year.

Craig Jelinek