# Costco Annual Letter 2013

**Dear Costco Shareholders, **

In September 1983, Costco opened its first warehouse in Seattle with plans for a regional warehouse club operation in the Pacific Northwest. Thirty years later, Costco is a multi-billion dollar global retailer with 648 membership warehouses in eight countries, delivering record sales this past fiscal year of nearly $103 billion and net earnings of more than $2 billion. We are pleased to review our fiscal year 2013 performance with you, and discuss our plans for 2014 and beyond. 

Our fiscal 2013 performance for the year ended this past September 1st, was the direct result of the efforts of our 184,000 employees worldwide working to fulfill our mission of delivering high quality goods and services at the best possible value. Proudly, Costco accomplished this while adhering to a set of core principles, which we call our Code of Ethics, set forth at the Company’s founding: Obey the Law; Take Care of our Members; Take Care of our Employees; Respect our Suppliers; Reward our Shareholders. Costco’s fiscal 2013 operating performance included the following highlights: 
- Net sales for the 52-week fiscal year increased 6% to $103 billion, exceeding $100 billion for the first time in Company history. Our average annual sales per warehouse increased to $160 million. 
- Membership fees increased 10 percent, the result of several factors: a continuing benefit from raising our annual membership fees in November 2011 for the first time in more than five years; strong new member sign-ups, particularly in a number of our international openings; increasing numbers of Executive Members; and continuing strong membership renewal rates (at 90 percent in the U.S. and Canada, and 86 percent worldwide). 
- Gross margin (net sales less merchandise costs) increased seven basis points as a percent of net sales, even as we continued to invest in lowering prices to our members. We maintained our pricing authority in all markets where we operate by ensuring our members receive outstanding values – high quality at great prices – each and every time they shop at Costco. 
- Our SG&A expenses increased just one basis point as a percent of sales, despite increasing cost pressures in employee benefits, workers’ compensation, stock compensation expenses, and the costs associated with a major effort, currently underway, to modernize our global IT systems and infrastructure.
- We returned nearly $3.6 billion to our shareholders, primarily in the form of dividends, including a special cash dividend of $7.00 per share (totaling $3.05 billion) in December 2012. 
- Net income increased 19 percent in 2013 to more than $2 billion, or $4.63 per share, compared to $1.7 billion, or $3.89 per share in 2012. Excluding a one-time, $.14 per share, tax benefit in 2013, earnings per share would still have been up 15% year-over-year. 
- Our balance sheet is very solid. Our cash position increased $1.1 billion to $4.6 billion, highlighted by operating income from our worldwide operations that generated more than $3.4 billion in cash. 
 
During 2013, twenty-six new Costco warehouses were opened in seven countries. These openings added square footage of about 4½ percent to our warehouse base, now totaling nearly 91 million square feet. Annualized sales in our twenty-six new warehouses averaged nearly $100 million during the first partial year of operations.

In the U.S., we opened 12 warehouses, including our first location in North Dakota (Fargo), and our first unit in Washington D.C. The remaining U.S. warehouse openings were in new and existing markets: Baxter and Rochester, Minnesota; Spanish Fork (Provo), Utah; Farragut (Knoxville), Tennessee; Concordville (Philadelphia), Pennsylvania; East Peoria, Illinois; Sun Prairie (Madison), Wisconsin; Wheaton, Maryland; Sugar Land (Houston), Texas; and Mount Vernon, Virginia. Five warehouses were opened in Japan (Kitakyushu, Hiroshima, Tsukuba, Chiba New Town and Chubu); three warehouses were opened in Canada (West Edmonton, Oshawa (Toronto) and Drummondville (Montreal)); three in the United Kingdom (Leicester, Southampton and Farnborough, England); one in Korea (Gwangmyeong); one in Taiwan (Chiayi); and one in Mexico (Chihuahua).

Several of our new locations generated large numbers of new member sign-ups and opening day sales in excess of $1 million. To support these high-volume warehouse operations, provide consistent in-stock positions and provide our members with the lowest possible prices, each of our international divisions operates at least one cross-dock distribution (depot) facility. These facilities are integral to our efficient supply chain logistics. 

Our plans for expansion in fiscal 2014 are for nearly thirty new warehouse openings, including 16 units in the U.S., four in Australia, two in each of Canada, Korea and Japan, and one in Mexico. Plans for fiscal 2014 also include the opening of our first warehouse in Spain. 

In the first three months of fiscal year 2014 we have opened 15 warehouses, including our first locations in two new states: Louisiana (New Orleans) and South Dakota (Sioux Falls). Other openings included our third warehouse in Monterrey, Mexico, our second warehouse in Columbus, Ohio, and new openings in Fort Wayne, Indiana; Bellevue (Green Bay), Wisconsin; North Riverside (Chicago), Illinois; Lexington, Kentucky; St. Albert (Edmonton), Alberta; Central Mississauga (Toronto), Ontario; North Plainfield, New Jersey; Cedar Park (Austin) and Lubbock, Texas; and two additional Australia buildings: Ringwood (Melbourne) and Crossroads (Sydney). 

We believe that our domestic and international growth plans, including infills in existing markets, will allow Costco to continue to gain market share and achieve long-term success on a global basis. We also see growth opportunities for E-commerce expansion as we continue to expand our members’ shopping opportunities beyond the walls of our warehouses. New E-commerce website platforms for our U.S. and Canada operations were launched in the fall of 2012, and mobile applications were operational shortly thereafter. Our United Kingdom website was launched in fiscal year 2013; and our Mexico website was added just after fiscal year-end. By leveraging technologies, we are able to offer our members an even wider assortment of merchandise at the values and quality they have come to expect from Costco. 

We expect to invest $2.4 billion in capital expenditures in 2014, including real estate purchases, construction expenditures, enhancements to our existing facilities, and furthering the modernization of our information systems and related activities. We expect to fund all of these activities with existing cash and cash flow from our operations. 

We are very aware of our responsibility to build and maintain our operations in an energy-efficient, sustainable and environmentally responsible manner. We continue to pursue opportunities to reduce our carbon footprint while at the same time decrease the costs of our operations. These efforts are not mutually exclusive, but are sometimes synergistic: the more efficient we can become the more we can reduce costs and reduce our carbon footprint. This is our challenge and our opportunity – to profitably grow our business in an environmentally responsible manner in the years to come. 

The performances of many of our warehouse ancillary businesses were noteworthy in fiscal 2013, with nearly all of these departments showing year-over-year increases in sales and profits. Our 414 fueling stations in the U.S. and Canada increased sales and profits despite a volatile gasoline market. The Costco Food Court’s limited menu didn’t limit sales, which continued to grow in 2013. Offerings included our famous hot dog and soda combination (still $1.50), pizza (whole or by the slice) and the turkey-provolone sandwich. 

Costco Optical continues to receive high marks for the quality and price of our designer frames and brand-name contact lenses, as well as the professionalism and expertise of our opticians and technicians. With 614 optical centers in operation worldwide, our growth rate in profits surpassed the rate of sales growth in 2013. Likewise, our Costco Hearing Aid Centers, now in more than 500 warehouses, increased profitability at a higher rate than the rate of sales increase. Such results were aided by the newest version of our highly rated, top-of-the-line Kirkland Signature digital hearing aids. Contributing to these successes, Costco Pharmacies also did well, particularly in over-the-counter sales, experiencing strong sales and profit increases, having added several Kirkland Signature products in 2013. Our pharmacies and highly trained professional pharmacists repeatedly receive accolades for customer service and extraordinary pricing – often offering prices for brand-name and generic prescriptions at a fraction of those charged by national and regional drugstore chains. 

At its core, Costco is a global company of exceptional merchants and operators who strive to continually increase efficiencies and reduce costs as they source, distribute, display and sell quality goods and services. With our global sourcing – now procuring products from more than 40 countries – we are able to provide our members with many items, such as fresh produce, throughout the year. 

Again in 2013 we expanded our private label, Kirkland Signature items, providing our members exclusive access to high quality products at great values. Notable new items include Kirkland Signature organic Honey Bears and several organic tomato products. Also new are Kirkland Signature Unsalted Fancy Mixed Nuts with Pistachios and Kirkland Signature Dark Chocolate Super Fruits, in addition to the Kirkland Signature Roasted Seaweed. Additionally, we continued to offer new exciting, upscale brand name products, in a variety of merchandise categories.

Preserving and enhancing the Costco culture created over the past thirty years was a pervasive theme throughout 2013, and remains a core emphasis as Costco moves into its fourth decade of operations. We remain focused on not just meeting, but exceeding the expectations of all our stakeholders, both locally and globally. As impressive as our success was in 2013, we continually ask ourselves: Are we improving our performance? Are we growing our business? Is our performance in the eyes of all our stakeholders – our members, our employees and our suppliers – better today than it was yesterday? Ultimately, can we reward our shareholders in the years to come as we have over the past thirty years? These are our challenges for 2014 and beyond. We are confident that the entrepreneurial and innovative spirit at every level of our Company will sustain our growth and will continue exceptional performance.

Our future looks bright. By leveraging the dedication and talents of our employees, and staying true to our core values, we will continue to delight our more than 71 million cardholders, increase our member base, and achieve continued success.

We thank you, our shareholders, for your trust and support over the past thirty years, and we look forward to seeing many of you at our Annual Meeting of Shareholders in Bellevue, Washington on Thursday, January 30, 2014. On behalf of everyone at Costco, we extend our best wishes to you and your loved ones for a wonderful holiday season and a healthy, happy and prosperous New Year! 

Best Regards,

Jeff Brotman
Craig Jelinek