# Customer Types

Customers are diverse but it pays to distinguish between two broad groups: retail consumers and corporate clients. Retail consumers can be fickle, acutely price-sensitive on some items and spendthrift on others. While marketing experts devote endless time to studying these varying proclivities, one thing seems clear: **Consumers are more willing to splurge on items offering [[Intangible benefits]], particularly for smaller purchases.**

Business consumers vary widely, especially in size, and small companies can be more like consumers, generally inclined to cost-consciousness  but occasionally willing to pay up for intangible or convenience benefits.  As a rule, the larger a company is, the more objective its purchasing decisions; it will focus on direct cost savings increases and the willingness to pay for intangible or convenience benefits decreases. In addition, large corporations increasingly use procurement departments that enhance rational behavior in corporate buying.

This does not mean corporations are not attractive customers, but that it requires deeper analysis to assess a supplier's ability to extract value form the sale. A few rules of thumb emerge. **First, buying corporations pay the greatest attention to high priced transactions involving contracts made at the highest level in the organization**. Companies can sell large numbers of lower-priced goods to corporate customers where purchase orders are made and approved without significant involvement of senior managers or the general counsel's office. **Second, sellers tend to fare least well on products sold to corporations through bidding processes or organized negotiations** where extensive product comparisons spell intense competition among suppliers that drives price down. Above all, the more a corporate decision is driven by price rather than other factors, the less attractive it is from a seller's viewpoint.

**Corporate buyers are generally more receptive than retail consumers to the concept of *total cost of ownership*.** A machine that provides reliability and/or measurable production cost savings can be priced to reflect such benefits. Similarly, corporations frequently embed the products of certain suppliers in their manufacturing processes. Given the size and complexity of many corporations, the cost of changing suppliers ([[Switching costs]])  can be significantly higher than simply the cost of product. Software is a great illustration: while there are cheaper alternatives to SAP, it dominates partly because customers know that switching is painful and expensive, in terms both of direct costs and business disruption.

**Corporate risk aversion is a powerful trait for sellers to exploit.** In large corporations, making significant mistakes gets both individuals and the entity as a whole into the deepest trouble. As the famous 1980's  saying goes, *No one ever got fired for buying IBM* (See [[Satisficing]], [[Logics is a commodity]] and [[Filtering]]). Similar to the case of retail customers, the prevalence of risk aversion among corporate buyers gives a clear advantage to products sold for their quality [[Assurance Benefits]].