### by Daniel Dennett
- Before Darwin, a "Mind first" view of the universe reigned unchallenged; an intelligent god was seen as the ultimate source of all Design, the ultimate answer to any chain of "Why?" questions. Even David Hume, who deftly exposed the insoluble problems with this vision, and had glimpses of the Darwinian alternative, could not see how to take it seriously.

- Darwin, setting out to answer a relatively modest question about the origin of species, described a process he called natural selection. A mindless, purposeless, mechanical process. This turns out to be the seed of an answer to a much grander question: how does Design come into existence? 

- Darwin conclusively demonstrated that, contrary to ancient tradition, species are not eternal and immutable; they evolve. The origin of new species was shown to be the result of "descent with modification". Less conclusively, Darwin introduced an idea of how this evolutionary process took place: via a mindless, mechanical - algorithmic -  process he called "natural selection". This idea, that all the fruits of evolution can be explained as the products of an algorithmic process, is Darwin's dangerous idea.

- Many people, Darwin included, could dimly see that his idea of natural selection had revolutionary potential, but just what did it promise to overthrow? Darwin's idea can be used to dismantle and then rebuild a traditional structure of Western thought, which I call the Cosmic Pyramid. This provides a new explanation of the origin, by gradual accumulation, of all the Design in the universe. Ever since Darwin, skepticism has been aimed at his implicit claim that the various processes of natural selection, in spite of their underlying mindlessness, are powerful enough to have done all the design work that is manifest in the world.

- Darwin's dangerous idea is that Design can emerge from mere Order via an algorithmic process that makes no use of pre-existing Mind. Skeptics have hoped to show that at least somewhere in this process, a helping hand (more accurately, a helping Mind) must have been provided - a skyhook to do some of the lifting. In their attempts to prove a role for skyhooks, they have often discovered cranes: products of earlier algorithmic processes that can amplify the power of basic Darwinian algorithm, making the process locally swifter and more efficient in a non-miraculous way. God reductionists suppose that all Design can be explained without skyhooks, greedy reductionists suppose it can all be explained without cranes.

- There are patterns in the unimaginably detailed Tree of Life, highlighting crucial events that made later flourishing of the tree possible. The eukaryiotic revolution and the multicellular revolution are the most important, followed by the speciation events, invisible at the time, but later seen to mark even such major division as those between plants and animals. If science is to explain the patterns discernible in all this complexity, it must rise above the microscopic view to other levels, taking on idealization when necessary so we can see the woods for the trees.

- The contrast between the actual and the possible is fundamental to all explanation in biology. It seems we need to distinguish different grades of possibility, and Darwin provides a framework for an unified treatment of biological possibility in terms of accessibility  in "the library of Mendel", the space of all genomes. In order to construct this useful idealization, we must acknowledge and then set aside certain complications in the relations between a genome and a viable organism.

- Biological possibility is best seen in terms of accessibility (from some stipulated location) in the library of Mendel, the logical space of all genomes. This concept of possibility treats the connectedness of the Tree of Life as a fundamental feature of biology, while leaving it open that there may also be biological laws that will also constrain accessibility.

- The R and D done by natural selection in the course of creating actual trajectories in the Vast space of possibilities can be measured to some extent. Among the important features of this search are the solutions to problems that are perennially attractive and hence predictable, like forced moves in chess. This explains some of our intuitions about originality, discovery, and invention, and also clarifies the logic of Darwinian inference about the past. There is a single, unified Design Space in which the processes of both biological and human creativity make their tracks, using similar methods. 

- There is one Design Space, and in it the Tree of Life has grown a branch that has recently begun casting its own exploratory threads into that Space, in the form of human artifacts. Forced moves and other good ideas are like Beacons in Design Space, discovered again and again, by the ultimately algorithmic search processes of natural selection and human investigation.As Darwin appreciated, we can retrospectively detect the historical fact of descent, anywhere in Design Space, when we find shared design features that would be vastly unlikely to coexist unless there was a thread of descent between them. Historical reasoning about evolution thus depends on accepting Paley's premise: the world is full of good Design, which took work to create.

 - How did the Tree of Life get started? Skeptics have thought a stroke of Special Creation - a skyhook - must be needed to get the evolutionary process going. There is a Darwinian answer to this challenge, however, which exhibits the power of Darwin's universal acid to work its way down through the lowest levels of the Cosmic Pyramid, showing how even the laws of physics might emerge from chaos or nothingness without recourse to a Special Creator, or even a Lawgiver. This dizzying prospect is one of the most feared aspects of Darwin's dangerous idea, but the fear is misguided. 

- There must have been a first living thing, but there couldn't have been one - the simplest living thing is too complex, too designed to spring into existence by sheer chance. This dilemma is solved not by a skyhook, but by a long series of Darwinian processes: self-replicating macros, preceded or accompanied perhaps by self-replicating clay crystals, gradually advancing from tournaments of luck to tournaments of skill over a billion years. And the regularities of physics on which those cranes depend could themselves be the outcome of a blind, uncaring shuffle through chaos. Thus, out of next to nothing, the world we know and love created itself.

- The work done by natural selection is R and D, so biology is fundamentally akin to engineering, a conclusion that has been deeply resisted out of misplaced fear for what it might imply. In fact, it sheds light on some of our deepest puzzles. Once we adopt the engineering perspective, the central biological concept of function and the central philosophical concept of meaning can be explained and united. Since our own capacity to respond to and create meaning - our intelligence- is grounded in our status as advanced products of Darwinian processes, the distinction between real and artificial intelligence collapses. There are important differences, however, between the products of human engineering and the products of evolution, because of differences in the processes that create them. We are just now beginning to get the grand processes of evolution into focus, by directing products of our own technology, computers, onto the outstanding questions.

- Biology is not just like engineering; it is engineering.It is the study of functional mechanisms, their design, construction, and operation. From this vantage point, we can explain the gradual birth of function, and the concomitant birth of meaning or intentionality. Achievements that at first seem either literally miraculous (e.g the creation of recipe-readers where none were before) or at least intrinsically Mind-dependent (learning to play winning checkers) can be broken down into the ever smaller achievements of ever smaller and stupider mechanisms. we have now begun to play close attention to the design process itself, not just its products, and this new research direction is deepening Darwin's dangerous idea, not overthrowing it. 

- The task of reverse engineering in biology is an exercise in figuring out "what mother nature had in mind". This strategy, known as adaptationism, has been an amazingly powerful method, generating many spectacular leaps of inference that have been confirmed - along with some that have not, of course. The famous critique of adaptationism by Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin focuses attention on the suspicions people have harbored about adaptationism, but is largely misdirected. The applications of game theory in adaptationism have been particularly fruitful, but one must be cautious: there may be more hidden constraints than theorists often assume.

- Adaptationism is not ubiquitous and powerful in biology. Like any other idea, it can be misused, but it is not a mistaken idea. It is in fact the irreplaceable core of Darwinian thinking. Gould and Lewontin's fabled refutation of adaptationism is an illusion, but they have raised everybody's consciousness about the risks of incautious thinking. Good adaptationistic thinking is always on the lookout for hidden constraints, and in fact is the best method for uncovering them.

- The view of Darwinian thinking presented so far in this book has been challenged, repeatedly, by Stephen Jay Gould, whose influential writings have contributed to a seriously  distorted picture of evolutionary biology among both lay people and philosophers and scientists in other fields. Gould has announced several different revolutionary abridgments of orthodox Darwinism, but they all turn to be false alarms. There is a pattern to be discerned in these campaigns: Gould, like eminent evolutionary thinkers before him, has been searching for skyhooks to limit the power of Darwin's dangerous idea.

- A review of all the major changes that have been leveled at Darwin's dangerous idea reveals a few surprisingly harmless heresies, a few sources of serious confusion, and  one deep but misguided fear: if Darwinism is true of us, what happens to our autonomy?

- Panspermia, intergalactic gene-splicers, and multiple origins of life on Earth are all harmless if unwelcome heretical possibilities. Teilhard's "Omega point", Lamarck's genetic transmission of acquired traits and directed mutation (without a crane to support it) would be fatal to Darwinism, but are safely discredited.  The controversies over the units of selection and the "the gene's eye point of view" are important issues in contemporary evolutionary theory, but they don't have the dire implications often seen in them, whichever way they come out.

- The primary difference between our species and all others is our reliance on cultural transmission of information, and hence on cultural evolution. The unit of cultural evolution, Dawkin's meme, has a powerful and underappreciated role to play in our analysis of the human sphere.  

- The invasion of human brains by culture, in the form of memes, has created minds, which alone among animal minds can conceive of things distant in the future, and formulate alternative goals. The prospects of elaborating a rigorous science of memetics are doubtful, but the concept provides a valuable perspective from which to investigate the complex relationship between cultural and genetic heritage. In particular, it is the shaping of our minds by memes that gives us the autonomy to transcend our selfish genes. 

- A series of ever more powerful types of mind can be defined in terms of the Tower of Generate-and-Test, which takes us from the crudest trial-and-error learners to the community of scientists and other serious human thinkers. Language plays the crucial role in this cascade of cranes, and Noam Chomsky's pioneering work in linguistic opens up the prospect of a Darwinian theory of language, but this is a topic that he has mistakenly shunned, along with Gould. The controversies surrounding the development in recent years of a science of the mind have been sadly amplified into antagonisms by misperceptions on both sides: are the critics calling for cranes or skyhooks?

- When generate-and-test, the basic move in any Darwinian algorithm, moves into the brains of individual organisms, it builds a series of ever more powerful systems, culminating in the deliberate, foresightful generation and testing of hypotheses and theories of human beings. This process creates minds that show no signs of "cognitive closure" thanks to their capacity to generate and comprehend language. Noam Chomsky, who created contemporary linguistics by proving that language was generated by an innate automaton, has nevertheless resisted all evolutionary accounts of how and why the language automaton got designed and installed, and has also resisted all Artificial Intelligence attempts to model language use. Chomsky has stood firm against (reverse) engineering, flanked by Gould on one side and Searle on the other, exemplifying the resistance to the spread of Darwin's dangerous idea, and holding out for the human mind as a skyhook.

- Real meaning, the sort of meaning our words and ideas have, is itself an emergent product of originally meaningless processes - the algorithmic processes that have created the entire biosphere, ourselves included. A robot designed as a survival machine for you would, like you, owe its existence to a project of R&D with other ulterior ends, but this would not prevent it from being an autonomous creator of meanings, in the fullest sense.

- One more influential source of skepticism about AI must be considered and neutralized: the persistently popular idea to the effect of Gödel's theorem proves that AI is impossible. Roger Penrose has recently revived this meme, which thrives in darkness, and his exposition of it is so clear that it amounts to exposure. We can exapt his artifact to our own purposes: with his unintended help, this meme can be extinguished.


See [[Evolution - Natural Selection and Extinction]]