# Decentralized Operations

All of our intelligent fanatics ran decentralized organizations that decrease management layers and increase employees autonomy. Many growing companies fail not due to external competition but because they become overmanaged and underled. Companies with strong leadership and a focus on maintaining a culture will win in the long term. It sounds like a simple concept, but it is extremely difficult to execute. Intelligent fanatics focus a lot of their mental energy on defeating bureaucracies before they form. 

There are many examples of companies that were not able to manage their growth successfully and became overmanaged and underled. From 1906 under the 1940s, for instance, the Haloid Company grew slowly, manufacturing photographic paper. By the mid-1940s, Joe Wilson took over, with a vision of building a copier business based on Chet Carlson's copying technology. Over the next decade, Wilson amassed a large patent portfolio, and in 1960 the company introduced the 914 office copier. The 914 and other models became so successful that the company, now called Xerox, was producing nearly $1 billion more in revenue by the late 1960s. To keep up with the exponential growth, the company brought in professional executives from a wide variety of large corporations in different industries. 

When Xerox brought in professional managers, however, they destroyed Joe Wilson's culture. Joe Wilson's Haloid was based on clear principles, described as "faith in people, concern for customers, and economic power through innovation, marketing, patents, and worldwide presence". Wilson was a strong leader, but the influx of professional managers brought a culture of arrogance, discouraged experimentation, and left not room for error. Xerox grew into a big company and suffered the consequences. Slow to innovate, the company lost half of its market share in the copier market by 1982, and the company has created virtually no shareholder value since 1977, with a 3% compound annual growth rate.

Intelligent fanatics win against internal bureaucracies by maintaining the leanness that helped their companies succeed in the first place. Herb Kelleher put it best: "The bigger you get, the harder you must continually fight back the bureaucracy an preserve the entrepreneurial spirit." Companies gain resources as they grow, and waste time on management layers and paperwork. However, a lean, entrepreneurial culture never has the time or resources to produce such waste. Southwest was able to operate with 20% fewer employees per aircraft and still be faster than its competitors. It took Nucor significantly fewer workers to produce a ton of steel, allowing them to significantly undercut their competitors' prices.

Intelligent fanatics have the courage to prevent arrogant bureaucracies from taking over their companies. In the early 1990s, Alfred West Jr., founder and CEO of SEI Investments, was having difficulty preventing the company's three units - banking, investment management, and consulting - from working against each other. It came down to Al bringing  in the literal and figurative sledgehammer. He destroyed physical layers - cubicles and offices - as well as titles, managers, and their assistants. Although it was a shock to employees and resulted in a few years of underperformance, the move  helped restructure the culture into a great one. Since the mid-1990s, SEI's stock has produced nearly a 20% compounded annual return and has received numerous accolades, from a listing on *Fortune* magazine's "100 best companies to work for" to entrepreneurship awards. Strong leadership and corporate culture are imperative to the success of decentralized organizations. Leadership and culture are driven from the top down in a way that influences employee devotion and buy-in.