# Diageo

Diageo, born out of the 1997 merger of Guinness and Grand Metropolitan, may be a relatively modern beast but the portfolio of [[brands]] it controls has remarkable and enviable [[Heritage - brands that improve with age|heritage]]. Many can trace their roots back to the 18th and 19th centuries. For example, Justerini and Brooks (J&B whiskey) was founded in 1749, and in 1758 Arthur Guinness brewed his first batch of the black stuff at St James' gate in Dublin, which still produces Guinness to this day. Several of the scotch distilleries were founded in the early 1800s, Lagavulin in 1816, and other brands like Tanqueray and Smirnoff date to the early-mid 1800s.

Most of these brands, headlined by Guinness, are stories of deep heritage plus savvy marketing that drives huge brand equity: enabling premium pricing and strong profitability. Just one example of how this brand history can drive both volume and pricing growth can be found in scotch whiskey, Diageo's largest category in emerging markets and accounting for one third of its gross profits. Johnnie Walker is the company's most important Scotch brand and its heritage is central to its appeal. It was first shipped internationally in 1860 and won its first award in Australia in 1879. The famous square bottles were designed to make these early shipments easier.

The brand enjoys a significant competitive advantage due to this unrivaled international history. But antiquity alone does not sell whiskey. To maximize its impact, the Johnnie Walker brand has been supported by considerable long-term investment at a level that simply would not be economic for a smaller brand. Diageo spends nearly $2.5 billion  annually on advertising and is regularly acclaimed for the impact and vision of its promotions. The Keep Walking campaign for Johnnie Walker resonated with consumers and the brand has grown to become the global category leader in Scotch by volume and value.

In the Scotch market, time is Diageo's friend in another way as well. By definition, Scotch must be aged at least three years, in a barrel, in Scotland. Whiskey matured for longer, often for more than a decade, commands premium pricing. underlining this point, in 2014 Diageo released 160 bottles of Brora 40 Year Old, its most expensive single malt to date. The retail price? More than $10'000 per bottle.

The time requirement acts as a powerful barrier to entry. A new entrant wishing to sell aged whiskeys must tie up huge amounts of capital before generating a dollar of revenue.  And the necessity of intricate forethought to lay down inventory so far ahead of demand means supply is often constrained for older, more profitable Scotch. Consequently, Diageo's market share in all premium Scotch is approaching 50%. The combination of heritage, strong brand positioning and high barriers to entry confers impressive pricing power on Diageo's Scotch products. In recent years, Diageo has delivered a 6% compound annual growth in revenues per case of Scotch.

Diageo is the world leader in premium spirits, with market shares averaging around 30%. Relative to the competition, it boasts a wider spectrum of price-points across a more extensive range of categories, which makes Diageo the partner of choice for distributors and, ultimately, customers. Diageo's brands are often the first and most broadly available in a market. These features reinforce each other: good consumer access to the brands justifies further marketing investment; brands generates [[Economies of Scale]] in advertising; brand strength increases, allowing for better pricing; and scale builds with positive implications for cost efficiency. 

This virtuous cycle magnifies the benefits of individual brand equity and helps to explain Diageo's high gross margins (consistently around 60%) and attractive operating margins of around 30%. The irreplicable heritage of many of the company's brands provides a durable competitive advantage for these strong financial characteristics. We note with interest the recent comment from Diageo's CEO that Guinness is still only 256 years into a 9'000 year lease on its Dublin brewery: time is still on Diageo's side!
