# Disruption Gets Too Much Attention

There is a common perception that the companies that innovate the best, while getting the "other stuff" (like manufacturing) mostly or somewhat right, are the ones that succeed over time. That statement puts the emphasis on disruption and undermines the importance of manufacturing, marketing and sales, and capital deployment. But the reality is that meaningful disruption is rare and far more difficult to accomplish than perceived.  Most companies do it once, providing the foundation for their existence, and then never do it again at anywhere close to the impact of that foundational event. Setting the expectation that an organization hist a home run on every innovation typically leads to no innovation at all.


Take 3M, the Minnesota-based maker of tapes and adhesives. Its most famous innovation was arguably the Post-it note, a ubiquitous sticky-paper product, the sales of which continue to grow with high and rising margins. it was a disruptive product innovation from 40 years ago. But the curse of the Post-it Note is that 3M scientists have spent the better part of the last few decades trying to duplicate its impact. Achieving disruption of this magnitude while predicting future customer needs is extremely difficult, particularly when you consider that the Post-it Note, like many other top innovations, was created largely by accident.

After that celebrated innovation, the company became so focused on the next big thing that it often forgot to do the small things well. 3M is still an excellent company by most measures, but it has gone through meaningful periods of underperforming its potential, with growth that hasn't exceeded that of far less innovative companies and costs that had a tendency to rise well beyond necessity. That said, there have been notable periods of brilliance, with two of the last five CEOs achieving remarkable results. The difference? The two CEOs, Jim McNerney and Inge Thulin, established two very common and simple mandates: the first was a hyperfocus on manufacturing excellence and included holding the line on costs in every part of the organization; the second established accountability for commercial outcomes in the R&D organization. Each of the CEOs made it very clear, via incentives and otherwise, that profit growth mattered more than market share and that developing new products ( often incremental improvements on proven platforms) that customers were willing to pay a premium for today was far more important than shooting for the moon tomorrow. Commercial behavior took precedence over disruption.

And the results are clear. Despite representing just 10 of the last 30 years, these two CEOs created nearly all of the shareholder outperformance in our study period. Both were far more successful than most CEOs of their respective time periods, despite being in some very mature businesses. There is no evidence that any less disruption occurred during these time periods. Scientists who are focused on near-term commercial outcomes seem to be just as likely to stumble upon something big as those whose days are spent dreaming big.

The 3M example is more common than not. We use it because the disparate management models of five unique CEOs show such extremes in stock market performance. Sharply rising profits in the McNerney and Thulin eras were rewarded by investors with sharply higher P/E multiples. We could have used dozens of other large companies to make the exact same point, however. Some far worse, in fact. GE under Jeff Immelt was a poster child for this dynamic. Its multi-billion dollar foray into industrial software let it do develop "disruptive" products that customers had no actual need or desire to purchase. Billions of dollars wasted just because the company never bothered to ask, or listen if it did, to *what the customer actually wanted*. GE was a company absolutely fixated on disruption. Despite a near endless budget and a full decade to make an impact, little of commercial value was accomplished. Good money followed bad, perhaps the most common failing of the Jeff Immelt era.

The reality is that all businesses are founded on some level of disruption, but the vast majority of success comes in the years to follow as products are incrementally improved, manufacturing is dialed in, and markets are broadened or further penetrated. It's notable that the two most successful companies in industrials over the last two decades, TransDigm and Roper, have no mandate, desire, or effort at all related to disruption. Each has created tremendous value purely by focusing employees on growing the cash flow of the businesses and levering that cash flow by investing in niche, high-return assets.