# Disruption through Technological Innovation

The word innovation carries positive connotations, along with gratitude toward great inventors who have improved life, such as Alexander Fleming's discovery of penicillin, Thomas Alva Edison's light bulb and Robert Noyce's integrated circuit. But, at least for capitalists, innovation is two-edged: while great improvements create new fortunes and even new industries, they often decimate others. 
Innovation can be such a brutal and destructive force for businesses that we often avoid industries where the risk of significant technological innovation is high. Among the most important questions we ask when investing is whether a company's products will still exist in a similar and relevant form ten years hence. See [[Long term investing]]

Asking this question doesn't solve all problems. Indeed buying a manufacturer of fax machines would probably have looked sensible until well in the 1990s. Even so, we still think asking the basic question reduces the temptation to wade into areas where rapid innovation is at play and is therefore likely to hurt us. Below we look at some of the risks associated with large-scale innovation and those industries characterized by high-paced innovation.

A cautionary stance on these types of innovation is why our investments are more tilted towards optically stodgier areas like elevators and cosmetics rather than electronics and e-commerce. People will want to travel safely down buildings even if they work for Amazon, and as long as people want to look good, they will buy cosmetics. 

### Scaling innovation risk
Small-scale innovation, like improved products packaging or safety, usually adds value and poses modest risk. It is large-scale innovation that can be perilous. Such innovation means disruption of existing economic models. Profit pools can rapidly shift from established companies to new ones. With every shake-up, some great businesses are destroyed while others flourish. But it is usually easier to identify innovation's losers well before picking the long-term winners.

In the news business, for example, it has long been evident that the ongoing trend toward online content would disrupt the economics of print newspaper publishers but even today it is not entirely clear how the historical profit pool will be split among consumers, new entrants, and incumbents. The same thing is happening in large parts of retailing with the emergence of dominant stars like Amazon.

As Harvard Business School Professor Clayton Christensen elucidates in *The Innovator's Dilemma*, even the most historically attractive business model can be shattered by innovation upheaval. While participants can invariably offer reasons why given changes are manageable or even present opportunities, we maintain a healthy skepticism. When momentous innovation rocks established industries, companies soon face frustrating choices. Infrastructure built around a certain method must be changed, yet it is not always obvious how to adapt. In the news business, for instance, the trade-off  - still unresolved - centers around whether to put online content behind paywalls, offer it free, or use some tiered combination. For traditional retailers, balancing store network pricing and mix with online pricing and mix remains perplexing. 

Big innovation results in more victims than victors, despite what incumbent industry leaders might assert. Exceptions to the historical pattern are rare so we are not patient with arguments about why this time or this industry is different. 

### Fast-Paced Innovation
Industries with high innovation rates are especially unpredictable. Even the best-positioned firm in a rapidly changing operating environment can easily be toppled. Given the unpredictable nature of rapid innovation, industries prone to it are unlikely to contain many quality companies. Such industries are more like lotteries, where a few stock pickers may get lucky once in a while but most lose out.