Distribution as a competitive advantage means that a company's route to consumers is more effective than its rival's for an otherwise equivalent product. For manufacturers who distribute through middlemen rather than making direct sales, relationships are critical. The best manufacturers nurture these relationships to make them mutually advantageous. Such relationships often provide a significant layer of protection for manufacturers.

Think of a scenario where a store feels the manufacturer treats it well, that customers like the product and product sales contribute meaningfully to the store's profit. It would take considerably more than a cheaper price from a rival manufacturer to induce the retailer to switch or alter its product mix. Rivals can offer lower prices, but a retailer faces risks: the relationship with the new manufacturer may not turn out as well or customers may like the alternative less.

Distribution as a competitive advantage changes when dealing with large chains where procurement is more rational. While relationships still matter, the laws of economics determine the competitive advantage. Consequently, they will bargain firmly, pitting manufacturers against each other, even dropping those who won't negotiate. In this case, having exceptionally strong product offerings that customers really want matters greatly.

When a company's ability to service or fix a product is vital to customers, distribution can take on a critical role. The need for a service network creates a chicken-and-egg problem for manufacturers. If customers don't buy a product unless they know it will get serviced, companies may have to invest in a service network in order to sell. Having a service network running at low utilization however is expensive. Consequently competing against companies with established service networks can be daunting, as it requires significant upfront costs. If such costs are high enough, they deter competitors.