

This book's intelligent fanatic CEOs first dominated a small market and then grew into larger markets. Another cause of failure among growing companies is simply growing too quickly, which can stretch a company's capabilities, balance sheet, and/or corporate culture too thin. Intelligent fanatics often pull back on the reins in the beginning so they can learn their lessons while they are small. Intelligent fanatic CEOs create a well-oiled machine before pushing the accelerator to the floor. It is also in the intelligent fanatics'best interest to strategically grow by utilizing cash flows, limiting equity raises, so they don't dilute their ownership position.

The cash register had practically zero worldwide penetration in the late nineteenth century, and John Patterson first dominated the saloon market. The big-box store format, which Sol Price largely created, has become an extremely large market in the United States, in many different incarnations. Independent discount tire shops had a large market, which Les Schwab first dominated in his local region and then expanded in other regions. Southwest airlines brought air travel to the common man, an enormous market. Southwest first dominated its region in Texas, then expanded to other regional airports, before expanding into larger airports. QuikTrip dominated the Tulsa, Oklahoma, convenience store market before growing into other markets. Nucor focused on basic steel products, such as steel rods, before expanding into complex steel products, and each 3G company focused on Brazil and increasing its talent pool before expanding internationally.

Any business with a large potential size is best served if cash reinvested back into the business. That way, one dollar is much more likely to be turned into many more dollars into the future. In all but one of our case studies, a majority of cash was reinvested back into the business for future growth. However, intelligent fanatics do not grow for growth's sake. They reinvest for market domination and much higher profitability in the future.