# Evolutionarily Stable Strategy

A strategy is a pre-programmed behavioral policy.  An example of strategy is: "Attack opponent; if he flees pursue him; if he retaliates run away." 

An evolutionarily stable strategy (or ESS) is defined as a strategy which, if most members of a population adopt it, cannot be bettered by an alternative strategy.
It is a subtle and important idea. Another way of putting it is to say that the best strategy for an individual depends on what the majority of the population are doing. Since the rest of the population consists of individuals, each one trying to maximize his own success, the only strategy that persists will be one which, once evolved, cannot be bettered by any deviant individual.

Following a major environmental change there may be a brief period of evolutionary instability, perhaps even oscillation in the population. But once an ESS is achieve it will stay: selection will penalize deviation from it.


### Hawks vs Doves
To apply this idea to aggression, consider one of John Maynard Smith's simplest hypothetical cases. 

Suppose that there are only two sorts of  fighting strategy in a population of a particular species, named *hawk* and *dove*. (The names refer to conventional human usage and have no connection with the habits of the birds from whom the names are derived - doves are in fact rather aggressive birds). 

Any individual of our hypothetical population is classified as a hawk or a dove. Hawks always fight as hard and unrestrainedly as they can, retreating only when seriously injured. Doves mainly threaten in a dignified conventional way, never hurting anybody. If a hawk fights a dove, the dove quickly run away, and so does not get hurt. If a hawk fights a hawk they go on until one of them is either seriously injured or dead. If a dove meets a dove nobody gets hurt; they go on posturing at each other for a long time until one of them tires or decides not to bother any more, and therefore backs down. For the time being, we assume that there is no way in which an individual can tell, in advance, whether a particular rival is a hawk or a dove. He only discovers this by fighting him, and he has no memory of past fights with particular individuals to guide him. 

Now as a purely arbitrary convention we allot contestants "points". Say 50 points for a win, 0 for losing, -100 for being seriously injured, and -10 for wasting time over a long contest. These points can be though of as being convertible directly into the currency of genes survival. An individual who scores high points, who has a high average payoff, is an individual who leaves many genes behind him in the gene pool. Within broad limits the actual numerical values do not matter for the analysis, but they help us to think about the problem.

The important thing is that we are *not* interested in whether hawks will tend to beat doves when they fight them. We already know the answer to that: hawks always win. We want to know whether either hawk or dove is an evolutionary stable strategy. If one of them is an ESS and the other is not, we must expect that the one which is an ESS will evolve. It is theoretically possible for there to be two ESSs. This would be true if, whatever the majority strategy of the population happens to be, whether hawk or dove, the best strategy for any given individual was to follow suit. In this case the population would tend to stick at whichever one of its two stable states it happened to reach first.

However, as we shall now see, neither of these two strategies, hawk or dove, would in fact be evolutionarily stable on its own, and we should therefore not expect either of them to evolve. To show this we must calculate average payoff.

Suppose we have a population consisting entirely of doves. Whenever they fight, nobody gets hurt. The contests consist  of prolonged ritual tournaments, staring matches perhaps, which end only when one rival backs down. The winner then scores 50 points for gaining the resource in dispute, but he pays a penalty of -10 for wasting time over a long staring match, so scores 40 in all. The loser also is penalized -10 for wasting time. On average, any one individual dove can expect to win half his contests and lose half. Therefore his average payoff per contest is the average of +40 and -10m which is +15. Therefore, every individual dove in a population of doves seems to be doing quite nicely.

But now suppose a mutant hawk arises in the population. Since he is the only hawk around, every fight he has is against a dove. Hawks always beat doves, so he scores +50 every fight, and this is his average payoff. He enjoys an enormous advantage over the doves, whose net payoff is only +15. Hawk genes will rapidly spread through the population as a result. But now each hawk can no longer count on every rival he meets being a dove. To take an extreme example, if the hawk gene spread so successfully that the entire population consists of hawks, all fights would now be hawks fights. Things are now very different.  When hawk meets hawk, one of them is seriously injured, scoring -100, while the winner  scores +50. Each hawk in a population of hawks can expect to win half his fights and lose half his fights. His average expected payoff per fight is therefore halfway between +50 and -100, which is -25. 

Now consider a single dove in a population of hawks. To be sure, he loses all his fights, but on the other hand he never gets hurt. His average payoff is 0 in a population of hawks, whereas the average payoff for a hawk in a population of hawks is -25. Dove genes will therefore tend to spread through the population.


The way I have told the story it looks as if there will be a continuous oscillation in the population. Hawk genes will sweep to ascendancy; then, as a consequence of the hawk majority, dove genes will gain an advantage and increase in numbers until once again hawk genes start to prosper, and so on. However, it need not be an oscillation like this. There is a stable ratio of hawks to doves. For the particular arbitrary points system we are using, the stable ratio, if you work it out, turns out to be 5/12 doves to 7/12 hawks. When this stable ratio is reached, the average payoff for hawks is exactly the same as the average payoff for doves. Therefore selection does not favour either one of them over the other. If the number of hawks in the population started to drift upwards so that the ratio was no longer 7/12, doves would start to gain an extra advantage, and the ratio would swing back to the stable state. Just as we shall find the stable sex ratio to be 50:50,  so the stable hawk to dove ratio in this hypothetical example is 7:5. In either case, if there are oscillations about the stable point, they need not be very large ones.


Superficially, this sounds a little like group selection, but it is really nothing of the kind. It sounds like group selection because it enables us to think of a population as having a stable equilibrium to which it tends to return when disturbed. But the ESS is a much more subtle concept than group selection. It has nothing to do with some groups being more successful than others. 

This can be nicely illustrated using the arbitrary point system of our hypothetical example.The average payoff to an individual in a stable population consisting of 7/12 hawks and 5/12 doves turns out to be 6 1/4. This is true whether the individual is a hawk or a dove. Now 6 1/4 is much less than the average payoff of a dove in a population of doves (+15). 

If *only* everybody would agree to be a dove, every single individual would benefit. By simple group selection, any group in which all individuals mutually agree to be doves would be far more successful than a rival group sitting at the ESS ratio. As a matter of fact, a conspiracy of nothing but doves is not quite the most successful possible group. In a group consisting of 1/6 hawks and 5/6 doves, the average payoff per contest is 16 2/3. This is the most successful possible conspiracy, but for present purpose we can ignore it. A simpler all-dove conspiracy, with  its average payoff for each individual of 15, is far better for every single individual than the ESS would be. 

Group selection theory would therefore predict a tendency to evolve towards an all dove conspiracy, since a group that contained a 7/12 proportion of hawks  would be less successful.  But the trouble with conspiracies, even those that are to everybody's advantage in the long run, is that they are open to abuse. It is true that everybody does better in an all-dove  group than in a ESS group. But unfortunately, in conspiracies of doves, a single hawk does so extremely well that nothing could stop the evolution of hawks. the conspiracy is therefore bound to be broken by treachery from within. 

An ESS is stable, not because it is particularly good for the individuals participating in it, but simply because it is immune to treachery from within.

It is possible for humans to enter into pacts or conspiracies that are to every individual's advantage, even if these are not stable in the ESS sense. But this is only possible because every individual uses his *conscious* foresight, and is able to see that it is in his own long-tern interests to obey the rules of the pact. Even in human pacts there is a constant danger  that individuals will stand to gain so much in the *short term*  by breaking the pact that the temptation to do so will be overwhelming. 

Perhaps the best example of this is price-fixing. It is in the long-term interests of all individual garage owners to standardize the price of petrol at some artificially high value. Price rings, based on conscious estimation of long-term best interests, can survive for quite long periods. Every so often, however, an individual gives in to the temptation to make a quick killing by cutting his prices. Immediately, his neighbors follow suit, and a wave of price cutting spreads over the country. Unfortunately for the rest of us, the conscious foresight of the garage owners then reasserts itself, and they enter into a new price-fixing pact. 

So, even in man, a species with the gift of conscious foresight, pacts or conspiracies based on long-term best interests teeter constantly on the brink of collapse due to treachery from within. In wild animals, controlled by struggling genes, it is even more difficult to see ways in which group benefit or conspiracy strategies could possibly evolve. We must expect to find evolutionarily stable strategies everywhere.

In our hypothetical example we made the simple assumption that any one individual was either a hawk or a dove. We ended up with an evolutionarily stable ratio of hawks to doves. In practice, what this means is that a stable ratio of hawk genes to dove genes would be achieved in the gene pool. 

The genetic technical term is stable polymorphism. As far as the maths are concerned, an exactly equivalent ESS can be achieved without polymorphism as follows. If every individual is capable of behaving either like a hawk or like a dove in each particular contest, an ESS can be achieved in which all individuals have the same probability of behaving like a hawk, namely 7/12 in our particular example. 

In practice this would mean that each individual enters each contest having made a random decision whether to behave on this occasion as a hawk or as a dove; random, but with a 7:5 bias in favor of hawk. It is very important that the decisions, although biased toward hawk should be random in the sense that a rival has no way of guessing how his opponent is going to behave in any particular contest. It is no good, for instance, playing hawk seven fights in a row, then dove five fights in a row and so on. If any individual adopted such a simple sequence, his rivals would quickly catch on and take advantage. The way to take advantage of a simple sequence strategist is to play hawk against him only when you know he is going to play dove.


The hawk and dove story is, of course, naively simple. It is a model, something that does not really happen in nature, but which helps us to understand things that do happen in nature. Models can be very simple, like this one, and still be useful for understanding a point, or getting and idea.  Simple models can be elaborated and gradually made more complex. If all goes well, as they get more complex they come to resemble the real world more. One way in which we can begin to develop the hawk and dove model is to introduce some more strategies. Hawk and dove are not the only possibilities. A more complex strategy which Maynard Smith and Price introduced is called *retaliator*.

A retaliator plays like a dove at the beginning of every fight. That is, he does not mount an all-out savage attack like a hawk, but has a conventional threatening match. If his opponent attacks him, however, he retaliates. In other words, a retaliator behaves like a hawk when he is attacked by a hawk, and like a dove when he meets a dove. When he meets another retaliator he plays like a dove. A retaliator is a conditional strategist. His behavior depends on the behavior of his opponent.

Another conditional strategist is called *Bully*. A bully goes around behaving like a hawk until somebody hits back. Then he immediately runs away. Yet another conditional strategist is *Prober-retaliator*. A prober-retaliator is basically like a retaliator, but he occasionally tries a brief experimental escalation of the contest. He persists in this hawk-like behavior if his opponent does not fight back. If, on the other hand, his opponent does fight back, he reverts to conventional threatening like a dove. If he is attacked, he retaliates like an ordinary retaliator.

If all the five strategies I have mentioned are turned loose upon one another in a computer simulation, only one of them, retaliator, emerges as evolutionarily stable. Prober-retaliator is nearly stable. Dove is not stable, hawk is not stable. Bully is not stable because a population of bullies would be invaded by hawks. In a population of retaliators, no other strategy would invade, since there is no other strategy that does better than retaliator itself. 

However, dove does equally well in a population of retaliators.  This means that, other things being equal, the number of doves could slowly drift upwards. Now if the numbers of doves drifted up to any significant extent, prober-retaliators, hawks and bullies would start to have an advantage, since they do better against doves than retaliators do. 

Prober-retaliator itself, unlike hawk and bully, is almost evolutionarily stable, in the sense that, in a population of prober-retaliators, only one other strategy, retaliator, does better, and then only slightly. We might expect, therefore, that a mixture of retaliators and prober-retaliators would tend to predominate, with perhaps even a gentle oscillation between the two, in association with an oscillation in the size of a small dove minority. Once again, we don't have to think in terms of polymorphism in which every individual always plays one strategy or another. Each individual could play a complex mixture between retaliator, prober-retaliator, and dove.

### War of attrition

Another kind of war game that Maynard Smith has considered is the war of attrition. This can be thought of as arising in a species that never engages in dangerous combat, perhaps a well-armored species in which injury is very unlikely. All disputes in this species is settled by conventional posturing. A contest always ends in one rival or the other backing down. To win, all you have to do is stand your ground and glare at the opponent until he finally turns tail. Obviously no animal can afford to spend infinite time threatening. There are important things to be done elsewhere. The resource he is competing for may be valuable, but it is not infinitely valuable. It is only worth so much time and, as at an auction sale, each individual is prepared to spend only so much in it. Time is the currency of this two-bidder auction.

Suppose all such individuals worked out in advance exactly how much time they thought a particular kind of resource, say a female, was worth. A mutant individual who was prepared to go on just a little bit longer would always win. So the strategy of maintaining a fixed bidding limit is unstable. Even if the value of the resource can be very finely estimated, and all individuals bid exactly the right value, the strategy is unstable.

Any two individuals bidding up according to this maximum strategy would give up at exactly the same instant, and neither would get the resource! It would then pay an individual to give up right at the start rather than waster any time in contests at all. 

The important difference between war of attrition and a real auction is, after all, that in a war of attrition both contestants pay the price but only one of them gets the goods. In a population of maximum bidders, therefore, a strategy of giving up at the beginning would be successful and would spread through the population. As a consequence of this some benefit would start to accrue to individuals who did not give up immediately, but waited for a few seconds before giving up. This strategy would pay when played against the immediate retreaters who now predominate in the population. Selection would then favor a progressive extension of the giving-up time until once more approached the maximum allowed by the true economic worth of the resource under dispute.


Once again, by using words, we have talked ourselves into picturing an oscillation in a population. Once again, mathematical analysis shows that this is not correct. There is an evolutionarily stable strategy, which can be expressed as a mathematical formula, but in words what it amounts to is this: each individual goes on for an unpredictable time. Unpredictable, on any particular occasion, that is, but averaging the true value of the resource. For example, suppose the resource is really worth five minutes of display. At the ESS, any particular individual may go on for more than five minutes or he may go on for less than five minutes, or he may even go on for exactly five minutes. The important thing is that his opponent has no way of knowing how long he is prepared to persist on this particular occasion.


Obviously, it is vitally important in the war of attrition that individuals should give no inkling of when they are going to give up. Anybody who betrayed, by the merest flicker of a whisker, that he was beginning to think of throwing up the sponge, would be at an instant disadvantage. If say, whisker-flickering happened to be a reliable sign that retreat would follow within one minute, there would be a very simple winning strategy: "if your opponent's whiskers flicker, wait for one more minute, regardless of what your previous plans for giving up might have been." If your opponent whiskers have not yet flickered, and you are within one minute of the time when you intend to give up anyway, give up immediately and don't waste any more time. Never flicker your own whiskers". 

So natural selection would quickly penalize whisker-flickering and any analogous betrayals of future behavior. **The poker face would evolve**.


### Asymmetric  Contests

So far we have considered only what Maynard Smith calls symmetric contests. This means we have assumed that the contestants are identical in all respects except their fighting strategy. Hawks and doves are considered to be equally strong, to be equally well endowed with weapons and with armors, and to have an equal amount to gain from winning. This is a convenient assumption to make for a model, but it is not very realistic. Parker and Maynard Smith went on to consider asymmetric contests. 

For example, if individuals vary in size and fighting ability, and each individual is capable of gauging a rival's size in comparison to his own, does it affect the ESS that emerges? It most certainly does. 

There seems to be three main sorts of asymmetries. The first we have just met: individuals may differs in size or fighting equipment. Second, individuals may differ in how much they have to gain from winning. For instance an old male, who has not long to live anyway, might have less to lose if he is injured than a young male with the bulk of his reproductive life ahead of him.

Thirdly, it is a strange consequence of the theory that a purely arbitrary, apparently irrelevant, asymmetry can give rise to an ESS, since it can be used to settle contests quickly. For instance it will usually be the case that one contestant happens to arrive at the location of the contest earlier than the other. Call them 'resident' and 'intruder' respectively. For the sake of the argument, I am assuming that there is no general advantage to being a resident or an intruder. As we shall see, there are practical reasons why this assumption may not be true, but that is not the point.

The point is that even if there were no general reason to suppose that residents have an advantage  over intruders, an ESS depending on the asymmetry itself would likely to evolve. A simple analogy is to humans who settle a dispute quickly and without a fuss by tossing a coin.

The conditional strategy 'If you are the resident, attack; if you are the intruder, retreat' could be an ESS. Since the asymmetry is assumed to be arbitrary, the opposite strategy 'If resident, retreat; if intruder, attack'  could also be stable. Which of the two ESSs is adopted in a particular population would depend on which one happens to reach a majority first. Once a majority of individuals is playing one of these two conditional strategies, deviants from it are penalized. Hence, by definition, it is an ESS.

For instance, suppose all individuals are playing 'resident wins, intruder runs away'. This means they will win half their fights and lose half their fights. They will never be injured and they will never waste time, since all disputes are immediately settled by arbitrary convention. Now consider a new mutant rebel. Suppose he plays a pure hawk strategy, always attacking and never retreating. He will win when his opponent is an intruder. When his opponent is a resident he will run a grave risk of injury. On average he will have a lower payoff than individuals playing according to the arbitrary rules of the ESS. A rebel who tries the reverse convention 'if resident run away, if intruder attack' will do even worse. Not only will he frequently be injured, he will also seldom win a contest. Suppose, though, that by some chance events individual playing this reverse convention managed to become the norm, and deviation from it would be penalized. Conceivably, if we watched a population for many generations we would see a series of occasional flips from one stable state to the other.

However, in real life, truly arbitrary asymmetries probably do not exist. For instance, residents probably tend to have a practical advantage over intruders. They have better knowledge of local terrain. An intruder is perhaps more likely to be out of breath because he moved into the battle area, whereas the resident was there all the time.

There is a more abstract reason why, of the two stable states, the 'resident wins, intruder retreats' one is the more probable in nature. This is that the reverse strategy, 'intruder wins, resident retreats' has an inherent tendency to self-destruction. It is what Maynard Smith would call a paradoxical ESS. In any population sitting on this paradoxical ESS, individuals would always be striving never to be caught as residents: they would always be trying to be the intruder in any encounter. They could only achieve this by ceaseless, and otherwise pointless, moving around! Quite apart form the costs in time and energy that would be incurred, this evolutionary trend would, of itself, tend to the category 'resident' ceasing to exist. In a population sitting at the other stable state, 'resident wins, intruder retreats', natural selection would favor individuals who strove to be residents. For each individual this would mean holding to a particular piece of ground, leaving it as little as possible, and appearing to 'defend' it. As is now well-known, such behavior is commonly observed in nature, and goes by the name of 'territorial defense'.


Biologists often ask what the biological advantage of territorial behavior are. Numerous suggestions have been made, some of which will be mentioned later. But we can now see that the very question may be superfluous. Territorial defense may simply be an ESS which arises because of the asymmetry in time of arrival that usually characterizes the relationship between two individuals and a patch of ground.


Presumably the most important kind of non-arbitrary asymmetry is in size and general fighting ability. Large size is not necessarily the most important quality needed to win fights, but it is probably one of them. If the larger of two fighters wins, and if each individual knows for certain whether he is larger or smaller than his opponent, only one strategy makes any sense: 'if your opponent is larger than you, run away. Pick fights with people smaller than you are.'

Things are a bit more complicated if the importance of size is less certain. If large size confers only a light advantage, the strategy I have just mentioned is still stable. But if the risk of injury is serious there may also be a second, paradoxical strategy. This is: 'pick fights with people larger than you are and run away from people smaller than you are'! It is obvious why it is called paradoxical. It seems completely counter to common sense. The reason it can be stable is this. In a population consisting only of paradoxical strategists, nobody ever gets hurt. This is because in every contest, one of the participant, the largest, runs away. A mutant of average size who plays the 'sensible' strategy of picking on smaller opponents is involved in a seriously escalated fight with half the people he meets. This is because, if he meets someone smaller than him, he attacks; the smaller individual fights back fiercely, because he is playing paradoxical; although the sensible strategist is more likely to win than the paradoxical one, he still runs a substantial risk of losing and of being seriously injured. Since the majority of the population are paradoxical, a sensible strategist is more likely to be injured than any single paradoxical strategist.

Even though a paradoxical strategy can be stable, it is probably only of academical interest. Paradoxical fighters will only have a higher average payoff if they very heavily outnumbered sensible ones. It is hard to imagine how this state of affairs could ever arise in the first place. Even if it did, the ratio of sensibles to paradoxicals has only to drift a little way towards the sensible side before reaching the 'zone of attraction' of the other ESS, the sensible one. The zone of attraction is the set of population ratios at which, in this case, sensible strategists have the advantage: once a population reaches this zone, it will be sucked inevitably towards the sensible point.



What if individuals retain some memory of the outcome of past fights? This depends whether the memory is specific or general. Crickets have general memory of what happened in past fights. A cricket that has recently won a large number of fights becomes more hawkish. A cricket that has recently had a losing streak becomes more dovish. Each cricket can be thought of as constantly updating his own estimate of his fighting ability, relative to that of an average individual in his population. 

If animals such as crickets, who work with a general memory of past fights, are kept together in a closed group for a time, a kind of dominance hierarchy is likely to develop. An observer can rank the individuals in order. Individuals lower in the order tend to give in to individuals higher in the order. There is no need to suppose that the individuals recognize each other. All that happens is that individuals who are accustomed to winning become even more likely to win, while individuals who are accustomed to losing become steadily more likely to lose. Even if the individuals started by winning or losing entirely at random, they would tend to sort themselves out into a rank order. This incidentally has the effect that the number of serious fights in the group gradually dies down.


I have to use the phrase 'kind of dominance hierarchy' because many people reserve the term dominance hierarchy for cases in which individual recognition is involved. In these cases, memory of past fights is specific rather than general. Crickets do not recognize each others as individuals, but hens and monkeys do. If you are a monkey, a monkey who has beaten you in the past is likely to beat you in the future. the best strategy for an individual is to be relatively dovish towards an individual who has previously beaten him. If a batch of hens who have never met before are introduced to each other, there is usually a great deal of fighting. After a time the fighting dies down. Not for the same reason as in the crickets, though. In the case of the hens it is because each individual 'learns her place' relative to each other individual. this is incidentally good for the group as a whole. As an indicator of this it has been noticed that in established groups of hens, where fierce fighting is rare, egg production is higher than in groups of hens whose membership is continually being changed, and in which fights are consequently more frequent. 

Biologists often speak of the biological advantage or 'function' of dominance hierarchies  (see [[Hierarchical Organization]]) as being to reduce overt aggression in the group. However, this is the wrong way to put it. A dominance hierarchy per se cannot be said to have a function in the evolutionary sense, since it is a property of a group, not an individual. The individual behavior patterns that manifest themselves in the form of dominance hierarchies when viewed at the group level may be said to have functions. It is, however, even better to abandon the word 'function' altogether, and to think about the matter in terms of ESSs in asymmetric contests where there is individual recognition and memory.

We have been thinking of contests between members of the same species. What about inter-specific contests? As we saw earlier, members of different species are less direct competitors than members of the same species. For this reason we should expect fewer disputes between them over resources, and our expectation is borne out. For instance, robins defend territories against other robins, but not against great tits. One can draw a map of the territories of different individual robins in a wood an one can superimpose a map of the territories of individual great tits. The territories of the two species overlap in an entirely indiscriminate way. They might as well be on different planets.

But there are other ways in which the interests of individuals from different species conflict very sharply. For instance a lion wants to eat an antelope's body, but the antelope has very different plans for its body. This is not normally regarded as competition for a resource, but logically it is hard to see why not. The resource in question is meat. The lion genes 'want' the meat as food for their survival machine. The antelope genes want the meat as working muscle and organs for their survival machine. These two uses for the meat are mutually incompatible, therefore there is conflict of interest.

Members of one's own species are made of meat too. Why is cannibalism relatively rare? There are some rare cases like the black-headed gull, where adults do sometimes eat the young of their own species. Yet adult carnivores are never to be seen actively pursuing other adults of their own species with a view to eating them.

Why not? We are still so used to thinking in terms of the good of the species' view of evolution that we often forget to ask perfectly reasonable questions like: Why don't lions hung other lions? Why do antelopes run away from lions instead of hitting back?

The reason lions do not hunt lions is that it would not be an ESS for them to do so. A cannibal strategy would be unstable strategy for the same reason as the hawk strategy in the earlier example. There is too much danger of retaliation. This is less likely to be true in contests between members of different species, which is why so many prey animals run away instead of retaliating. It probably stems originally from the fact that in an interaction between two animals of different species there is a built-in asymmetry which is greater that between members of the same species.

Whenever there is strong asymmetry in  a contest, ESSs are likely to be conditional strategies dependent on the asymmetry. Strategies analogous to 'if smaller, run away; if larger, attack' are very likely to evolve in contests between members of different species because there are so many available asymmetries.

Lions and antelopes have reached a kind of stability by evolutionary divergence, which has accentuated the original asymmetry of the contest in an ever-increasing fashion. A mutant antelope that adopted a 'stand and fight' strategy against lions would be less successful than rival antelopes disappearing over the horizon.


ESS thinking is applicable wherever we find conflict of interest, and that means almost everywhere.

