# Experiments in Corporate Culture

An adaptive culture is necessary to transform a company with the changes of an evolving market. The larger a company becomes, the more difficult it is to innovate and keep up with smaller, more nimble competitors. Intelligent fanatics and their employees are unstoppable in their pursuit of staying ahead of the curve. They test out many ideas, like a scientist experimenting to find the next breakthrough. In the words of the head of Amazon Web Services, Andy Jassy, "We think of these investments  as planting seeds for very large trees that will be fruitful over time."

Not every idea will work out as planned. Jeff Bezos, the founder and CEO of Amazon, said "A few big successes compensate for dozen and dozen of things that did not work out." Bezos has been experimenting for years and often has been unsuccessful. One notable failed experiment was the failure of the Amazon Fire Phone, released in 2014. By the end of 2014, Amazon had written off its investment in Fire by $170 million, and the product was discontinued in 2015.

Jeff Bezos embraces failure, because it is necessary for innovation. Although his flops have cost money, some of the experiments have been home run. Amazon Web Services is one of these examples. AWS contributed $7.9 billion in revenue in fiscal year 2015, and growth rates for AWS are more than 70%, compared to the 6% average growth of competitors. AWS would have been nonexistent if Amazon weren't constantly experimenting. 

According to a 2016 job listing for a senior data scientist, Netflix, under Reid Hastings, "has maintained a relentless focus on experimentation in order to improve the experience for their members."  The company has a Streaming science and algorithm team whose sole purpose is to test and develop new approaches to improve the user experience.

High-technology founders are not the only CEOs who benefit from this approach to innovation. Most people don't think of retailers, steel producers, brewers, or airlines as innovative companies, but our intelligent fanatic CEOs, in non-tech companies, were relentless in developing new products and services. They had the courage to try new ideas and to learn through failure. 

Simon Marks experimented with new synthetic fibers that drove down the cost of manufacturing and increased the quality of clothes. Ken Iverson always had employees experimenting on ways to make their steel production more efficient. Herb Kelleher had employees experimenting with new (single) ticketing technologies and other ideas to make Southwest a more efficient operation. The 3G partners had employees at Brahma experimenting with ways to improve their efficiency. 

These experiments will only benefit a company if employees are encouraged to take calculated risks. The company has to be a supportive environment. All of our case studies promoted a culture of experimentation. 