# Experian

## A forbidding [[Cost to Replicate]]
The United Kingdom's credit reporting industry dates to 1803, when a group of London tailors starting sharing information about deadbeat customers. In 1826, the wonderfully named "Society of Guardians for the Protection of Tradesmen against Swindlers, Sharpers and other Fraudulent Persons" was established in Manchester. Later that century, several credit agencies were founded in the United States, including Jim Chilton's Merchants Credit Association, which provided annual printed credit directories to subscribers and pioneered two enduring initiatives: collecting positive as well as negative information and convincing member merchants to confidentially share credit information for associational use.

Chilton's business and the Manchester society would, many years later, become part of Experian, a global leader in today's credit information business.  Experian's primary asset is a massive database of consumer credit data contributed over many decades by legions of financial institutions, retailers, utilities and other creditors. To enrich the database, the company harvests extensive information from various public sources and exclusive data sets. Data has been accumulated and synthesized  through outlets worldwide, from the UK and the US to Brazil.

In the UK, the foundation was Britain's largest retailer and consumer creditor, Great Universal Stores (GUS). It computerized its data in the 1960s and added vast information from electoral rolls  and court records, and began commercializing the product in 1980.  In 1996, GUS acquired the leading US credit rating agency, owned by TRW, whose founders include Dr Si Ramo, the rocket scientist. Among Ramo's prescient prophecies (besides his 1961 vision of a cashless society) were automating credit reporting, predicting payment patterns, and scoring credit quality. Ramo and TRW spent decades vindicating those prophesies,  as they collected and standardized volumes of consumer credit information. In 2007, Experian (as the combined UK and US business was then known)  acquired Serasa, Brazil's market leader in the field, founded in 1968 by a consortium of regional banks.

Through such global agglomerations of venerable data compilers, Experian's databases are the product of a lengthy and intense process of collecting, matching, contrasting, verifying and analyzing abundant information. Contemporary global systems add incremental bits of information daily, each being trivial but when added to the storehouse able to enhance credit histories and facilitate pattern recognition. So besides costing a fortune to build, data accumulate daily to amplify returns.  Individual data contributors expect to benefit from the aggregation of credit information from fellow creditors, creating a powerful  [[Network Effects]].

The result is an industry prone to consolidation. In the US, the market is dominated by three credit agencies with approximately even market shares; outside the US, most markets are duopolies, with one dominant and one subservient rival. Barriers to entry are formidable from scale, complexity and pricing. Experian also leverages its core assets into related areas, such as data analytics. Both its core and complementary businesses involve products - information - that can be sold multiple times, slashing marginal costs. 

Outcomes are impressive: solid ten-year organic sales CAGR of 6% for the group and growing operating margins form 21% a decade ago to 27% today. The foundation of these strong results is the company's unique and irreplaceable database assets. 