# Fielmann

For nearly half the developed world's population, the first task if every morning - even before checking email - is to reach for the device that allows them to see: glasses. Spectacles have morphed from medical necessity into fashion accessory, with the latest styles advertised by glamorous celebrities. This was not always the case.

As recently as the 1980s, health insurance plans offered vision coverage limited to a small set of dull, monochrome, and unfashionable frames. The vision-impaired who wanted something more had to pay and costs were high, leaving many to suffer the stigma associated with cheap eyewear. Manufacturers accepted the status quo, which allowed them to charge a premium price for fancy glasses, while opticians enjoyed a comfortable living form fitting a few pairs a day.

In Germany, one man drove change: Guenther Fielmann, who opened his first optician store in 1972. From the outset, he pursued a strategy of selling fancier glasses at lower prices, forgoing some of the high potential margin per unit to drive volume growth. His more fashionable, yet thrifty, frames proved an attractive proposition to price-conscious Germans.

Fielmann proceeded to build a chain of stores. As volume increased, he improved his purchasing terms by cutting out the wholesaler. But Fielmann major breakthrough came in 1981, when he struck a deal with the German state health insurer to let him offer 90 new, more fashionable, frames to customers at the same insurance cost as the existing few standard-issue frames.

This was a masterstroke, as suddenly huge numbers of customers could enjoy a wide variety of fashionable glasses with third-party payment. Volume growth spiked. Fielmann leveraged the growth to backward integrate, sourcing its own label frames and lenses, and optimizing the whole retail process. Pricing cuts, savvy marketing, and retail integration forged Fielmann path to [[Market Share Gainers| market dominance]].  Today, Fielmann's share of the German eyewear market exceeds 50%, yet it sells this volume through stores representing only 5% of the store base. 

With [[Economies of Scale]] and [[Forward Integrator| integration]] come cost advantages. Fielmann's unit cost is an estimated quarter of its rivals. Given that its volume moves through such a small portion of the market's total store base, Fielmann relative fixed costs are also comparatively low. To encapsulate, Fielmann sells 20 times more glasses per day per store than its rivals at a much lower unit cost with fractional overheads. Even with lower prices, therefore, we estimate that Fielmann nets as much per pair of glasses as rivals but at higher margins, approaching 20%.

Fielmann's fortress-like market position is reinforced by yet another advantage: leadership in the labor market. A substantial barrier to industry growth is lack of qualified staff, as the unemployment rate for German opticians is barely below 1%. One reason is German law, which requires the optical shops be run by master opticians; a status that takes three or more years to attain. While rivals struggle, Fielmann runs a optician training academy and trains 3'000 eye care professionals annually, amounting to nearly 40% of industry apprentices.

The German optical industry may not sound like the hottest growth market - and it isn't.  But the qualities that enabled Fielmann to take market share at a rate of 1-2% annually for a few decades are compelling. The share gains drive attractive long-term compound growth (EPS has tripled in the past decade). With limited capital requirements for growth, cash is ample, despite a dividend payout ratio of 85%. Nor is there any sign of the company's cost or price advantages eroding. Indeed, given Fielmann's influence over the labor pool, prospects for future market share gain remain as strong as ever. 
