The [[Capital Cycle]] can be very detrimental to the revenues of a company.

A business that is solely linked to customer's capital expenditures makes for a much more complicated investment than one linked to their operating costs. In most cyclical industries, capital equipment is purchased amid periods of capacity expansions. When iron ore prices rise, mining companies plan and build new mines; but when they fall, new projects are postponed or canceled.

For a company whose profits are dependent on such capital expenditure, it is extremely difficult to predict results. Even a rough guess requires insights into both commodity pricing and how miners evaluate investing in new capacity at different price levels. A more reliable estimate would consider long-term demand trends for the given commodity.  While some industrial economists with related expertise might be able to model this, we find it too challenging to translate into a predictable cash flow pattern and therefore tend to steer clear.

On the other hand, for a company whose profits tie to customers' operating costs, cyclicality poses less risk of disruption and remains relatively predictable. Even during cyclical downturns when prices are low, most producers maintain existing facilities and even production levels while cutting capital expenditures. So long as production is substantially maintained, suppliers of products tied to production and operating costs typically face less disruption from the cycle. 

We call these *flow products*. Mills have to be maintained. Production equipment requires spare parts and regular maintenance. Tests must be run on extracted oil or minerals. So companies with mos of their profits pools from flow products tend to experience less profit erosion during downturns. Likewise, during upturns, theirs are not among the products that spike in demand, aiding prediction. In both phases of the cycle, this is especially true for differentiated rather than commoditized products. Therefore, we like to focus on flow products with genuine differentiation benefits. 

The relative attractiveness of flow products versus capex products offers two broader lessons. First, even if companies sell to less cyclical industries, steady revenue streams from flow products are typically more attractive than those dependent on capex. Partly, this is due to the fact there is often more pronounced cyclicality in capex spending than many investors estimate. If economic uncertainty runs high, all kinds of customers hold back on spending. the lesser predictability is undesirable. 

Second, spending on flow products tends to invite less customer scrutiny. Capital investments, whether on a drilling rig or a new office building, always receive serious price attention. Flow products, on the other hand, slop more easily below the radar because of their smaller size and greater regularity.