# Franchising

The economics of a strong franchise model are often compelling. In its purest form, a franchise-based business provides growth funded by third parties - franchisees - an theoretically infinite returns on capital. Franchising is arguably the ultimate expression of brand power: franchisees pay fees for the right to use a [[brands]]. The fee level is justifies by the economic power of the brand. 
Take Holiday Inn, a brand owned and franchised by Intercontinental Hotels Group. Franchisees pay approximately 5% of revenues, through good times and bad, for the right to put the Holiday Inn flag above their hotel door. The franchisees, in turn, gain access tot he branded firm's well-established central booking system, which drives the majority of sales. The result for the business is a higher level of revenue per available room, an industry benchmark, relative to rivals.
Since revenues  are more stable over time than net income, the revenue-based franchise fee adds predictability to the franchisor's return. For the franchisor, expansion requires modest incremental capital, as franchisees are typically required to provide most of the assets, including property, fixture and fittings. Franchisor's margins are also high: Intercontinental Hotel Group boasts EBIT margins exceeding 80% in its franchise division. Once critical mass is established, the incremental profit contribution from additional franchised revenue is substantial. 
Successful franchising models generally have two characteristics. Fist the underlying business needs powerful economics: strong enough for a third party to make an attractive return even after paying a fee to the brand owner. Second, there is a minimum scale requirement: the company must have the infrastructure to support a franchise system an the financial firepower to support a brand with A&P. 

Such characteristics are developed over time. Most predominantly-franchised businesses have gradually migrated from making money and building brand equity in company-owned outlets. It is difficult to franchise out a new, unestablished brand. However, where the right conditions exist, the benefits can be material for both the franchisee and the brand owner. 
