Don't let the preceding discussion about [[The Friendly Middleman]] make you think that every company always benefits equally from having a third party choose the product while a different party pays the bill. There is considerable variation to the payoffs from this three parties pattern. 
The involvement of independent financial advisors or procurement consultants, for instance, can complicate purchasing processes. These professionals sometimes function more as costly gatekeepers than friendly middlemen. The middleman needs reasons to recommend a company's product and companies employ various strategies to provide these.

One is product differentiation. The company distinguishes its product in terms of value either to the middleman or to the end user. The middleman must have a reason to endorse this product over another. Among expert middlemen, such as doctors or craftsmen, a reputation for product excellence and/or outstanding service will often suffice. Experts tend to take pride in their own professional reputations, which are best protected and enhanced by association with likewise reputable items. Reliable customer service is equally important, as the middleman takes the blame for product delays and malfunctions.

**For complex products or those that are difficult to install or consume, professional training is a compelling lock-in strategy.** If a third party provider is well trained in the installation of one company's product, chances are they will stick to it and recommend it to customers. As a bonus , training also serves as a barrier to entry: professionals weaned on a given product or technique face [[Switching costs]] to learn how to handle rival offerings.