# Games Workshop - Replenishing your IP

by #InPractise 

Warhammer is a fantasy world where Orks, dwarves, monsters, and elves group together into armies for gamers to fight on tabletop games. Games Workshop, creator and owner of the Warhammer IP, sells miniature figurines that gamers purchase, paint, and collect. The company has created an ecosystem around Warhammer that has compounded FCF ~18% for 23 years.

From the 1980’s to 2004, Games Workshop (GAW) consistently grew revenues by opening new stores and growing the Warhammer player base. In the early 2000’s, the company signed their first license to produce miniatures and games for the Lord of the Rings franchise ahead of the movie launch. Lord of the Rings (LotR) was a huge success and Games Workshop saw revenue increase as new gamers purchased LotR miniatures and games. However, this growth was short lived. Sales peaked in 2005 at £158m and slumped to £110m in 2008. It was only until 2017 that sales reached £150m again. Games Workshop literally lost 13 years in growth.

Growth is a function of the capital reinvested and the incremental return on the capital invested. GAW had spent the early 00’s investing into the Lord of the Rings and not their core Warhammer owned-[[Intellectual Property]] . This grew sales and brought in many new customers but these were not true Warhammer fans. They didn’t have the ‘Hobby Gene’ that defines a Warhammer fan. GAW had underinvested in their core asset that caused growth to stagnate after Lord of the Rings movies was released.

In the mid 2000’s, GAW went through a management change and focused on cutting costs to regain profitability. GAW came to realise a focus on costs rarely grows the topline. Assets need to be replenished to maintain a steady level of growth. Just as physical assets require regular maintenance, intangible assets need to be regularly replenished. This quote really stuck out from our recent interview:

> _The best way to think about it is comparing it with newspapers or comics. How often do you buy yesterday's or last week's newspaper? If you have every Batman comic, which is the most exciting one? It is the next one. I want to see this story develop and I want to find out what happens next. One of the absolute charms of building your own IP, such as Warhammer, is that it is constantly evolving and you can introduce new things. Models which were sculpted 10 years ago start to look a bit dated so you re-sculpt them and release those, and people add them to their army. People who were not playing 10 years ago see them and think they look fantastic._

Intangible assets need regular ‘maintenance’. For consumer or luxury brands, marketing spend could be seen as maintenance spend. If consumer brands don’t market their brands effectively, it diminishes the asset value. If Nike doesn’t have the best athletes representing them, they will sell less shoes.  Gaming IP is no different. It needs regular ‘maintenance’ and deep, attentive care. The reason intangible assets are attractive is because the incremental rate of return on the ‘replenishment’ spend is typically higher than that for tangible assets. But if you miss a replenishment cycle, it can cause a huge decline in revenue and make it very difficult to revive the core asset. This seems to be the trap GAW fell into. During and after the LotR launch, they didn’t create enough exciting new games or market effectively online to recruit new users. This cost the company 13 years of growth.

There seemed to have been an inflexion point in 2015 when Rountree was named CEO. The company launched Age of Sigmar, a new world which brought churned users back into the ecosystem, and Warhammer has a thriving online community to recruit 13-15 year old gamers. Sales per store has increased from £300k in 2006 to over £500k today with 2021 EBITDA nearly equal to 2007 revenue.

But this begs the question: is gaming IP still ‘hit driven’? As gaming companies move online and sell more in-play recurring digital products and fewer hard discs, there is a view that gaming cash flows are more sustainable and should be worth more to investors. This is probably true. But this doesn’t mean the market is not still hit driven. If the business misses a IP-replenishment cycle, you can lose 3-5 years in FCF growth. Do we really know if sales per store couldn’t reach £300k for GAW again? If they didn’t refresh enough armies or create a new world like Age of Sigmar, maybe it is possible. Replenishing intangible assets is far more difficult than a physical asset, but when you do get it right, you can generate >80% ROIC like GAW.