# Global Capabilities and Leadership
History is littered with examples of impressive franchises that were eroded by the encroachment of foreign rivals. In the 1980s, European consumer electronics makers all but disappeared after Japanese manufacturers entered the market with higher quality and better priced alternatives. In the 1990s, England's financial industry, a cozy coterie of large firms centered in London, was shocked to find American investment banks aggressively muscling in on their territory. 

Other strong domestic companies try to project their might abroad only to fail, proving unable to transplant their strengths. A recent example is Tesco, the venerable British grocer whose efforts to expand globally backfired.

We seek out these companies that prove able to project strength outward, entering and conquering foreign markets. The pattern they fit is having demonstrable global capabilities, often backed by industry leadership. Successful global expansions tends to reflect a number of factors, prominently including experience, product differentiation and adaptability.

By *global industry leadership*, we are referring more to product differentiation and business model than scale. A global industry leader's business model and products must stack up well against competitors in other markets. For example, Rolls Royce engines compete well against any jet engine form US peers Pratt & Whitney or General Electric. While Rolls Royce will not win every battle, it always has a good shot.

A focus on global leadership is warranted for two reasons. For one, it is unsafe to assume that even the most powerful domestic company will remain dominant when there are superior peers operating in the same industry abroad. While these potential competitors may never choose to enter the domestic market in question, their very existence presents a large unquantifiable risk that is best avoided. Even companies with localized advantages such as scale in retailing can be affected, which is evident from the disruption of grocery markets from Spain to the UK by German deep-discounters.

The other reason to stress global leadership relates to ability to expand. Without industry leadership, companies struggle to enter new markets. Offering products that can win customers as easily in Boston as in Beijing is therefore a big plus. 

A good indication that a company has global capabilities is a track record of successfully adapting a business model from one setting to another, at home and abroad. Many European companies started in small countries, so they were often forced to develop the ability to expand into new markets: witness the expansion of Swedish engineering firms such as ASSA ABLOY and [[Atlas Copco]]. Larger European companies like Shell, Nestlé and [[Unilever]] honed their capabilities decades ago when large parts of the world were still under European influence. We view such experience positively; it opens the door for more sustainable growth than geographically constrained companies can manage.

Willingness and ability to adapt to local tastes, cultures, and logistical challenges is critical. A great example is Yum!, which owns the KFC and Pizza Hut brands. A quick glance at KFC or Pizza Hut menu in Beijing would be enough to show how much these brands have adapted to  cater to local tastes. In addition to the chicken and pizza that the US patrons would recognize, the restaurants meet local demand for a variety of local Chinese food from rice dishes and spicy soups to congee. Such adaptability is often the result of considerable trial and error and takes time - both brands have been in China since the 1990s. The effort yields significant payoffs, including making Yum! the largest restaurant operator in China, boasting some 5'000 KFC outlets and 1'700 Pizza Huts. 