# Good Enough Goods
Premium pricing is a significant source of value creation for many quality companies. By virtue of competitive advantage based on factors such as brand strength, they price products higher than similar alternatives. The strategy's success depends on offering demonstrably greater benefits compared to rival products. We refer to products that rivals push to challenge that advantages as *good-enough goods*.

The leading examples are private label retailer alternatives to branded products, such as those offered by pharmacies and grocers. By offering similar products at lower prices, chains steer consumers to focus on price rather than quality. Once the switch occurs, consumers tend to stick with the private label.  Other examples are the low-cost airline industry pioneered by the likes of Ryanair as an alternative to major carriers such as British Airways and open source software, such as Linux, as an alternative to [[Microsoft]] Windows. 

Good-enough value propositions can be difficult to protect against. On the downside, risk are greater when products are distributed through influential middlemen that command customer respect, such as retailers creating private labels. Such middlemen have their own economic incentives to create their own good-enough goods. On the other hand, rivals are not invincible and where private label have tried and failed - such as in personal care markets, and segments of the food and beverage industry - it is often a sign of brand strength. 

Niche products are typically better protected than large product categories because good-enough goods are likely to require scale to work. Above all, if consumer benefits are genuine and strong, the risk of good-enough competition reduces proportionally. We struggle to see how a good-enough handbag will ever be a credible threat to a branded luxury-good handbag. Similarly, we doubt that many airlines (or their pilots) would want to fly aircraft with a good-enough engine rather than one with an impeccable record for safety and soundness. 

See also [[Satisficing]]
