# Harris Podcast with Mark Leonard - Transcript


**Jeff Bender :**  Hello and welcome everyone to our latest experiment, the Harris podcast. my name is Jeff Bender and I'm here to help you better understand who we are, where we are going, and to engage you on our journey. These podcasts are intended to introduce you to our leaders, our initiatives, and to new ideas and ways of thinking. Our goal is to not only inform you but to engage you in helping us create an enduring organization. Please Enjoy.

On this podcast I'll be speaking with Mark Leonard, founder, president and chairman of Constellation Software, our parent company. Mark founded Constellation in 1995, 25 years ago, using a less than memorable initial name in this business case and pitch, referring to it simply as *Software Co*. Over this 25 years period, Constellation has invested in over 500 businesses, now has more than 3 billion dollars in net revenues, and more than 25'000 employees worldwide. CSI is currently organized in six operating groups, Harris being one of them.

I've been fortunate to work with Mark for over 20 years, watching him reinvent himself, to genuinely challenge me to become a better investor, an owner of the businesses we bought. Please join Mark and I, as we learn to know him a little bit better and understand how he thinks about our two areas of focus, being disciplined deployers of capital, and great owners of VMS businesses. Mark, welcome to the podcast.

**Mark Leonard :** Thank you Jeff, looking forward to it.

**Jeff Bender :** To start with, which I think is an area you don't typically talk a lot about, but if you were from Harris I would typically use my three-kids or my wife to illustrate a point or to make a point. Would you mind sharing with us what your family situation is and what your kids are up to?

**Mark Leonard :** - laughing - Family situation, wow. My wife and I met in business school, she's French Canadian, she's the nicest human being that I know. Everyone adores her. She's kind and thoughtful and goes out of her way. Really I would not have achieved anywhere near what I've achieved without support and her taking care of the family. As you mentioned I have four kids, they are in their early 30s to mid 30s now, we get along well and visiting a couple of them right now out on the West Coast. One thing I am kind of surprised is at how open people are about themselves and their families in this Internet age, because nothing ever disappears.

I learned early when I was in the venture business that whatever you say to thirdparties tends to get used in whatever way they wish to use it. When I was in the venture business I had a bad experience with the press, and that really put me off talking with them, and made me very careful about what information about companies we shared. We were very careful to create full messages, but even then we recognize that  you deliver full messages which means that the journalist does not have to work particularly hard and they can just take the whole thing, lock, stock and barrel and use it and move on, you get a good chance of getting that full message through. But if what they do is trying to be sensational, they will pick and choose and mis-use whatever you delivered to them. And that kind of irresponsible use strikes me as the norm.

And I find, even when I look at Internet chat groups of various kinds, the breadth of opinions and interpretations is extremely large. And so one thing i try to do is insulate my kids from that. If they choose to be on the Internet and know for particular things and create their own brand, and to some extent some of them have in their particular rounds, that's great. But I do warn them that you don't control what happens when it gets out there. So yes I have four kids, and you're welcome to talk about how they live their lives on the Internet or elsewhere.

**Jeff Bender :** Yeah I find that -  using my kids  - it can often be hard to become relatable to everyone and I found that using real-life stories, a lot of people also experience it and can relate to, and it also helps with talking to customers or to employees. That's sort of a tool that I use and I think that it has been helpful over the time and the feedback that I've received - people like it. But I do appreciate what you say - everything you put out there can and will be used against you at someone else's choice and discretion, which is not always yours for sure.

**Mark Leonard :** Just a quick observation on that. You're talking here about using story-telling and empathy as tools to communicate. I think among our groups of managers you are the best I've ever seen, you are remarkable at it. And it's a determinant skill, I encourage people to use it because as humans we tend to relate to stories. And certainly, as we go through this I try to find stories that kind of illustrate sort of beliefs that I have and wanna share. Hopefully though, also beliefs that are grounded in facts and not fiction.

**Jeff Bender :** I appreciate that. Now I wanted to pick up on something that you actually mentioned on our last Constellation board call, and that's something I think - I can't remember what we were talking about or whether we were all waiting to start the meeting - but you had mentioned or I believe I heard you mention that you had just bought a mortar mixer. Could you maybe provide more color on why someone such as yourself would be buying a mortar mixer and what you plan to do with it.

**Mark Leonard :** I don't recall what it was but it was probably sort of what we're doing in these Covid times that's out of the usual. One of the jobs I had along the way was working as a mason's helper. It was one of those things you do to make money. And as it turned out it was a wonderful job for me, one where at the end of the day you knew what you had achieved and you had a sense of accomplishment and you knew that what you did will probably still be there in a hundred years time. So that was pretty cool work. I could work as a mason when the seasons were good and I had figured out I could go to school on a semester time basis as opposed to full time, and so when I was collecting unemployment I could go to two different schools part time, collect unemployment. And once spring rolled around I could go back to work as a mason.

I did that for several years and I worked with a wonderful old mason. He was as old as the hills - kind of a hobbit of a human being. Small, incredibly muscled old guy with a straw hat and a pickup truck that was about as old as he was, tools that came from the middle ages and he sort of taught me the trade. And I started off mixing mud and mortar for him and dressing stones, and eventually pointing some walls and then building some walls. It was Idyllic. I would take my breaks and read wonderful literature, and then go back to being on a scaffold three stories up in the air pointing a stonewall. It was just a remarkable time. I lived on a farm and had an old car and one of my brother came and lived with me and worked on one of the big mills we were doing. So passion days! Going to school, learning, reading, being healthy... And so I'm trying to recapture some of that. You know maybe on weekends I can be Wally the old mason again. 

**Jeff Bender :** That sounds very inspirational. So when you were reading literature, were there authors that you would tend to read more of their work?

**Mark Leonard :** You know at that time I think I was reading John Fowles, who was a remarkably good writer, and John Barth and those kind of folks. It really was literature. It was not ancient or classical literature, but modern literature. 

**Jeff Bender :** Interesting. Now obviously everybody will be listening to the podcast and obviously going through their own changes to their routines as a result of Covid 19, what do you think to be the biggest difference to your sort of daily or typical routine that you try to adjust to because of Covid?

**Mark Leonard :** Well I think it is the same thing that you have adjusted to, which is not being in an airplane. It's lovely, but at the same time it's also a big big change. Not rushing to the airport, spending time in the airport and on airplanes. I do miss some of those southern air flights to Europe where you get uninterrupted time. But the good side of Covid for me has been surrendering to good habits. So I work out more regularly, I sleep more, I eat better, and it's been good. 

**Jeff Bender :** Yeah people ask me all the time if I miss traveling. I started working about how to think about it and establishing new habits and I realized that a lot of my thinking time, and even a bit of down time happen when I was traveling, whether it was spending time at the airport, spending time at hotels, I really started to understand how much I miss those long 7,8, when I was in Israel, you know, 10 to 12 hours flights. To just kind of, unwind things, reflect and do other things whereas now I find, the days are pretty standard, they come and go pretty quickly and it takes more of an effort to carve out that time to sort of be, again, more thoughtful and more reflective. I keep working on that. I try to keep my Wednesdays now where I try not to book too many meetings just to try to you know, get myself some time to think about those types of things. 

So do you have a morning routine? Is there a typical way that you like to start each day?

**Mark Leonard :** I tend to wake up between four and five and have the same breakfast and read two or three newspapers so, yeah, it is pretty standard. 

**Jeff Bender :** So what newspapers do you read?

**Mark Leonard :** You know, because we're in Canada, the Royal Mail is sort of the leading business newspaper but for other employees around the world you recognize the Financial Times from London which I read. And if I got through those two I will make my way into the Wall Street Journal. 

**Jeff Bender :** Oh, interesting, Ok. I know Jerry is a big fan of the Wall Street Journal. Doug, Doug Read is a big reader of papers in the morning. He has, I think it's called the South China News, he likes to add it to his readings as well to have something more of a global flavor.

So, I understand you have your Bachelor of Science, which I think is not super typical among the people we have here at Constellation, so why did you choose to study science, especially given what you just explained with your mason work?

**Mark Leonard :** What I did was dabble. So I was in many different faculties and many different universities, and over a seven year period I eventually ended up with a three-year science degree. In between I played a lot of bridge and sports and tried a lot of different faculties. 

**Jeff Bender :** What was your sport of choice?

**Mark Leonard : ** I played varsity basketball, varsity football and varsity rugby. Rugby was by far and away my preferred sport. 

**Jeff Bender : ** Back to your science degree. Would you say that you used what you learned in your science program today at Constellation?

**Mark Leonard :** You know I think there is always something you take from what you study. And I had one particular professor who had an impact upon me, fairly late in my academic career. I had a number of other profs who influenced me as well. But I think one of the characteristics of us as human beings is that our memories and knowledge has a half-life. So the stuffs we learned 40 years ago, very little of it is being used by us today. We constantly replace what we know by what is currently correct, and what we currently believe to be correct. So you got to be a lifetime learner, you got to keep sort of fill in your mind with new ideas and knowledge. And the old stuff becomes increasingly less relevant. 

**Jeff Bender :** One of the books I read recently, I forgot the author's name now but it was called *Think like a rocket scientist*, and one of the things that I took away that was interesting and caused me to sort of re-think how I go about testing the hypotheses in our portfolio is to move away to this *test it to see if you're right*, whereas the scientific approach is actually to *prove that it is actually wrong*, and if you can't prove it's wrong, perhaps, maybe there are some beliefs that you can take forward. And I think a lot of us get caught up into this paradigm of proving that we're right, and we are just looking for anything we can find that proves that we're right. And once we've found it we just want to believe it's right. And that is not the best way to go about figuring out the right thing to do. 

**Mark Leonard :** So a well-understood human frailty, it is called confirmation bias. And if you give people ten pieces of data they will choose the one that confirms what they want to believe, even if the other nine say that they're wrong. A lot of that research on human bias was done by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Daniel actually got the Nobel prize for behavioral economics. He has written a wonderful book that I recommend to everyone, called *Thinking Fast and Slow*. It came out about a decade ago. it's probably the book I recommend most to the people inside of Constellation and to our investors. It talks about, basically the biases that we carry as humans and how we can to some extent understand those biases and since it is very very hard to actually counteract something like confirmation bias unless you frame the question in a different way, which is what you were suggesting. We should try to disprove our hypothesis rather that prove it.

**Jeff Bender :** Well I read an article about Kahneman recently and someone asked him, given he has studied it and he has his theories about it and he has won the Nobel Prize, whether he still falls subject to the same biases and he said like "Oh yeah. I am not different from anybody else, I just might be a little more reflective on sort of realizing after the fact that I have actually fallen for the same biases". Which I thought was very authentic of him but very sobering to your point on understanding how we human are actually wired to think and make decisions.

So my final question regarding your education was in your MBA, what was the course that you found the most interesting and what was it that made it the most interesting for you?

**Mark Leonard :** I saw in your notes that you want me to talk about this and I wrecked my brain and could not think of any course that I liked in the MBA program. Partly that was because I went to a school that uses the case method, and hence they didn't really teach the principles, they taught the cases. And you were supposed to extract from the cases the principles. And I was not very good at doing that. 

**Jeff Bender :** And would you recommend people the MBA as an additional source of education and learning? What's your thoughts on MBAs? 

**Mark Leonard :** I think a blend of theory and cases is the ideal and I think Weston, the school I went to, was far too heavily cases-oriented. The other challenge is that a lot of professors are not great teachers. So the most fun I had at Weston was  baiting the professors in the case methods. They had the case notes and they knew what they wanted to extract out of those fifty or hundred pages tomes that they'd dump on you along with three others before to read. As they ran the class, the greatest fun was sort of getting them off track and away from what they wanted to deliver, and they were frequently arrogant and poorly prepared. And so that was probably my greatest joy at Weston. 

**Jeff Bender :** I am sure they just loved you. 

**Mark Leonard :** Yeah, a number of them did.

**Jeff Bender :** So switching over to work experience, as I think you shared with us some of the masonry work you did. Now I read somewhere, and I cannot remember where I read it, but it also said that you also had two, what appeared to be, jobs or things that you did. One being a gravedigger, and one being a bouncer. First, is this true? 

**Mark Leonard :** Yeah.

**Jeff Bender :** Alright. Any elaboration about the digging graves or being a bouncer or perhaps how they helped you see things differently today?

**Mark Leonard :** Not really. I mean, along the way I was a municipal worker too, you know, doing work in parks and painting fences and cutting weeds and all that other stuffs. I worked in a warehouse and I was a draftsman, and I turned keys at some major buildings, and I was in the reserve, I moved furniture at night because that's often when office moves tend to happen, I did research on *inaudible*. You kind of do what you need to do to survive and you move on. Often that time isn't well-spent but it's something you don't have a choice about. You need the money and you do, like I said, what you need to do. But at the same time, i think if you are putting yourself through school and learning a particular skill that you eventually become   good at, you praise that more highly because of the journey, because of all the things that you had to do to get there. And recently, it sort of feels that way. 

**Jeff Bender :** So what then, when I look at your earlier experiences, they definitely seem to be more physical in nature, although If I reflect back on some of mine I also would have been like that, back to your point about you gotta do what you gotta do to pay your expenses, to pay for your education, and obviously you don't have a lot of skills and qualifications, so that type of physical work tends to be more available. But the shift of using the physicality of your body to earn income and do what you were doing, to the intellectual pursuit of becoming an investor, how did that shift happen?

**Mark Leonard :** Yeah I guess the MBA probably was the think that took a hodgepodge of jobs and education and gave it directions. And once again, when I graduated, I took the job I had to take, which was a job in banking. But I was fortunate that I had a summer job between the years of the MBA where I had someone who - we're still friends - coached me. He basically seized me up. I was working at a bank, a British  bank - Barclay's - in Toronto, and he said, "You will be a terrible banker. And why don't you go down to the files - they were physical files - and read about the bank's clients and figure out where you'd like to work?" And so for a portion of the summer I did that. The other portion of the summer I worked on a computer system for him with spreadsheet-type programs that long predated -and ran on many computers - Excel, and did modeling for complex leases, which was great fun. But the rest of the time I read the files at Barclay's and I came across a venture capital company. One of the original sort of merchant banks that moved into venture capital and I decided that that's what I wanted to do. 

So when I graduated I tried to get a job in venture capital but there were literally nothing in Canada. So I went to work for an American bank and it happened to be one that had a large venture subsidiary so I fought like hell to get into their US venture group but failed, and I came back to Canada, still working for that American bank, and tapered the mailboxes of the whole venture capital industry in Canada, to know all the key people, went to their conferences, pay for it out of my pocket, and when my wife and I had no money, I eventually managed to crack in the venture industry and got in. I was one of the four hundred applicant for a job that was advertised in the Global Mail. And that was how I started the venture career. 

**Jeff Bender :** And what was it about about venture capital that prepared you to be so tenacious to get into it?

**Mark Leonard :** I think once you had all those jobs that you did not want to have and you had to have, the idea of a job that you really wanted was a really attractive thing. So that probably explains the tenacity, plus the support of my wife in pursuing it. What appealed to me was the stories and history of venture capital, the creation of wonderful companies that I knew of, and so I was really keen to be part of that. Now once I joined the industry, I found it wasn't particularly that way, but from the outside it looked very exciting. It certainly attracted a group of very smart and driven people. So you had both variety and a sort of intellectual elitism, that created a fatal attraction, at least from my perspective, to the industry. 

**Jeff Bender :** And how long did it take you to realize that perhaps it didn't look like you wanted it to be? 

**Mark Leonard :** So you get in and you're working with people and perhaps with the people that you, ideally, like to be working with, and then you kind of re-orient, and then eventually I found my way into Ventures West, which was, at the time, the cream of the crop of the venture industry in Canada. They had some of the brightest folks I ever worked with, absolute superstars, and they were ethical and hard-working and just remarkable human beings. So it wasn't a people problem, and it wasn't the variety of the work problem, I mean it was astonishingly attractive. Within my personal portfolio within Ventures West, I had a group of photo-chemists that I worked with, and then another day I would work with the leading group of remote-sensing technologists in the world, and I worked with the Dr Frankenstein of the plants biotech industry, who was creating new plants by moving genes around. It was absolutely fascinating. But after a while, you want to succeed with these things, not just to stumble along, and I think that need for mastery and focus and becoming really good at something, drove me towards focusing on what ended up being Constellation Vertical Market Software, and creating a permanent capital vehicle for the Vertical Market Software Industry where you did not have to buy and sell a business.  You can hold forever, you can build relationships that lasts a lifetime, and you can build businesses that we intend on being around as long as the clients are in existence. 

And that's a very different perspective from the venture industry which, when it comes down to it, is all about creating things that you can sell to other people, either as IPOs, or outright sales. And so that's a different business model for the venture industry. And within Canada at least you could not focus narrowly enough in any particular segment that you could be a real specialist as a venture capitalist. 


**Jeff Bender :** And so, why Vertical Market Software? Did you have experience with VMS when you were at Ventures West or is this just something that you came across as you were looking to master something and to apply knowledge?

**Mark Leonard :** Yes I did have a bit of experience with Vertical Market Software, but the way I came to it, as a path for permanent capital vehicle and a place to focus wasn't because of any particularly fascinating technology. It was really because of a high quality business model. And what led me to thinking about high-quality business models was one particular individual. So at one stage as I was exploring venture capital and trying to figure out different ways to do my work, one of the ideas I had, my hypothesis, was that you could back great horses instead of any particular race on which to run. And one of the horses I backed was a guy named Steve Scotchmer. And I worked with him for a number of years, he came from the advanced materials industry, looking for advanced material companies that we could invest in and he could run. And he had a great track record and he was a very thoughtful engineer. 
As I worked with him, I always found that his bar for business quality was extraordinarily high. He was looking for really really great businesses. We never succeeded in founding one that he wanted to invest his life in and I wanted to invest the venture capital in. 

But Steve had made some money from his previous venture that got sold out, so he was also learning about investing. And as he was learning about investing, he was teaching me about investing.  What he learned about investing he passed on to me. He learned about the great investors, and Buffett and Munger were certainly a big part of that, but there were also other people who influenced his investing philosophy as well, including some in Canada who he introduced me to. So here I had started off as a venture capitalist, i was very tech-oriented, I was very much in the sciences, and suddenly the person that was to become the most important mentor in my life sort of hold me about thinking about really great business models and investing. And so I was pivoting and then looking back through the portfolio of Ventures West for these really great business models, I realized that a couple of the Vertical Market Software things that we had done were ideal, except they were small. They weren't ever gonna be big businesses that warranted significant capital and could be a big enough canvas on which to work, so I came up with the idea of creating a holding company for such businesses. If they were great small, medium-sized businesses, why not owning a bunch of them? And that was the genesis of Constellation. 

**Jeff Bender :** Now when you took this idea back to the partners at Ventures West did they look at you like you had three heads? What did they perceive of your idea?

**Mark Leonard :**  It's interesting. As I mentioned they're really smart, driven people and nearly all of them had this large, total available market mindset, that big-winner kind of approach to their thinking. It's what makes the venture capital business. But at the same time they knew that what were were doing in Canada wasn't working particularly well, and so it was important to try and experiment other things. They enabled me to work on the idea, and when we funded it, also provided some of the capital personally as individuals, and then when we took it public, many of them - I think all of them - became shareholders in the IPO as well.

**Jeff Bender :** So why then, as we are talking about going public and maybe just a bit pre-public, why did you pick OMERS as a partner, as a shareholder at sort of the pre-public time? Why did you think they were a great partner? What did you think they brought to the table that you did not have or could not have on your own?

**Mark Leonard :** So I went out initially to a number of our entrepreneurial limited partners and to some high net worth individuals that I knew to raise capital and I got some *inaudible* and then I went to OMERS who was our biggest limited partner at Ventures West and talked to them. They were interested but not on traditional venture capital terms, and not on terms that were particularly attractive to any other investor so to speak. So I had a difficult choice. I could either go the OMERS route, and have my fundraising done alongside the money that the Ventures West partners were going to put in, or I could spend a considerable amount of time trying to draw out  significant capital elsewhere and probably not have OMERS play because they had already dictated the terms on which they would play. And so I took the easy way out. I took the OMERS money, which enabled us to get 25 million Canadian Dollars, and launched the business and get on with it.

There is one other thing that is probably relevant to your audience and that is that at OMERS, the person in charge of the group that invested in Constellation was someone I knew from business school. And so frequently you'll find that your acquaintances, your network are important, and he knew me really well. And I knew him really well. We trusted each other and liked each other. Now that worked out great except that at some stage he became aware of some problems inside of OMERS and tried to get them sourced and that put him politically in a difficult position and he ended up leaving. And the people who ended up working with him were not a trusted relationship, the senior people, and so that's the reason why we sought another large investor. 

So you can have a good relationship with a single person inside of a large institution, whether it'd be a customer or a supplier, or in this case a provider of capital, and if you lose this single point of contact, you really can be in a difficult position. So one of the things I did was diversifying our sources of capital and managed to get TD Capital in, as a rather major shareholder, private equity shareholder. 

**Jeff Bender :** So if you look back on sort of first partnering with OMERS, did you think you would have done it if you didn't have the trusted relationship with the first individual you had met at business school?

**Mark Leonard :** I don't think OMERS would have done it. Would have I done it? I was probably naive enough to be taking the check irrespective of the fact that I did not know who I would have been taking it from at that stage. 

**Jeff Bender :** So Bernie  Anzarouth is our Chief Investment Officer and is employee number 1 or - he's number 1 or number 2 - how did you and Bernie meet and built a relationship that survived 25 years, which I would say is fairly unheard of these days, I think it is just a great story.

**Mark Leonard :** I am trying to think back to the exact circumstances of how we met. First, Bernie was employee number 2. I have employed employee number 1, because Ventures West leaned on me and said "you should have a CFO".  And so I went out and got one. 

And that by the way is a good lesson also. If you lean on people to do something, they generally comply without doing it the way you would like to do it, and so employee number 1 ended up leaving us fairly quickly.

Bernie was an analyst for us and I hired him into Ventures West because that was a whole lot easier to do rather than hiring him into Software Co, it was not a household name at the time. Ventures West was a reasonably well-known venture group and Bernie was a new grad from INSEAD, or relatively new grad from INSEAD. He was obviously very bright, he had a technical background, international experience, and like most hires it is a crap shoot. 

You know when you hire from the outside into senior roles, I think we have around a 50% success rate. So it is not easy. In this particular instance I worked closely with Bernie. He would either gonna end up developing respect or indifference or contempt for the person. And we were lucky, we ended up respecting each other, and it's been a great relationship for the whole way through. Literally I can't think of any major argument we've had along the way and we've been thoroughly enjoying working together. 

**Jeff Bender :** It is a great story. I think that anybody that gets to work with people that closely will cherish the opportunity to have built such a great relationship.

You took Constellation public in 2006. Why take the company public? 

**Mark Leonard :** The capital we had raised in 95 didn't really have a ticking clock on it because it was from a pension fund. But the capital we raised from Berkshill (TD Capital) definitely had a ticking clock on it. Their fund was a ten year fund - or at least I assume it was, most of the venture funds were. And so I knew I had to find them an exit at one stage. What tends to happen with private equity firms is that if you don't find them an exit, they'll find themselves an exit. And that usually involves whistling in some high bankers to dress you up for sale and then running an auction. 

So going public was one of the routes to get an exit and so we explored it and executed it. It wasn't particularly tough, we had a reasonable story to tell, we weren't raising a lot of capital. I guess the only peculiarity was that the capital we did raise, we raised by selling shares on behalf of owners and Berkshill. 

**Jeff Bender :** Yeah Constellation did not raise any equity itself, it was just for the exit of shareholders. 

**Mark Leonard :** Yes exactly, it was for providing liquidity to the shareholders. 

**Jeff Bender :** Any regrets having gone public? Obviously to your point you felt it was something you had to do given the capital structure. But now you can reflect back and it's been fourteen years. Any regrets on that decision?

**Mark Leonard :** No. The one thing I would counsel anyone taking any company public, and we are going to be shortly spinning out a company from within Constellation, the only advice i can give you is to pick your shareholders if you ca, and to work at attracting these kind of shareholders that you think you'd like to be associated with for the long term.

**Jeff Bender :** Did you find this more difficult now? Before we had a relatively low turnover in our shares, there weren't a lot of buying and selling shares of Constellation very often. That number is obviously creeping and creeping and creeping, I haven't seen the real number for December but.. so are you still happy with the cohortes of our major shareholders today?

**Mark Leonard :** You know we have some shareholders who are long-term shareholders but that cohorte is much smaller that it ever was, and increasingly the index funds have become a big and important cohorte of what we do here at Constellation.

**Jeff Bender :** Yep I can definitely see that. And the bigger we get, the more we are around the radar, or under the requirements for many different funds, for sure. 

So I want to go back to a point you touched briefly on, hiring from within when  you were talking about when I asked you a question about Bernie. To your point I think that our success rate of bringing in certainly senior leaders from outside of Constellation, you put it, that was about 50-50 hit rate or success rate, which is, you know, not really great when you're thinking about the impact and how long we want to have employee among us, it's not really great for a track record. Your sense whether we should continue to focus on creating better paths for people within Constellation Software to move up to more senior levels, or trying to understand and be better at bringing in external people for some of the benefits that they would bring when they come?

**Mark Leonard :** It's a tough one. I would rather hire high quality talent with a long runway and then develop them internally and give them rapid development path, than trying to go outside and bring in people who are ready to slot in relatively senior roles. And that's partly because I think what we do is different. I think we're very unusual. Firstly you don't get many Vertical Market Software companies that are at scale and that play into multiple verticals, and do what we do. That are very investment-savvy and return-on-capital-employed oriented, while at the same time thinking about the very long term. And so I'd much rather want to get someone who is smart, has had a job or two, knows what working is like and knows something good when they see it, and then introduce them to Constellation and hope they find what they're looking for in a place like Constellation. 

**Jeff Bender :** Yeah It's definitely a tough one. When you look at our lack of success but also one of the things that struck me lately is infusing existing thinking and ways of doing things with new and different thinking, so I thought a lot of times we've convinced ourselves, we tell ourselves the same narratives, the same story and then we believe it, and over time it's not that the story might change totally, but it definitely changes and I think sometimes we are not as quick or as fast as we need to be to adjust, and I think sometimes balancing the individuals that you describe with again bringing in some other people with different ways to looking at things, different ways of thinking, it strikes me as balanced between us, you know, finding ways to be more successful within the businesses that we own. I'm doing some work now with a company inside of Constellation, and they have a metric. I haven't well figured out again how well they score this metric. But they look for 25% of their leaders - I did not define what leader meant - but between new promotions from within and people brought in from the outside, they want 25% of their leaders to be different in each year. And the idea behind it is really to, again, drive different thinking, bring a sort of different focus, a different drive, a different momentum to keep moving forward, which I thought was an interesting way to look at things. Rather than doing it the same old way because that's how we've always done it. It's an interesting concept for sure. 

**Mark Leonard :** Yes, it's also at General Electric where you knew you had your job for 3.7 years, and you were always thinking about what your next job was, and in 3.7 years you were keen to hit all your objectives, make your boss happy, have good reviews, and get a better next job. And that led to tremendous success for General Electric, everyone was on the same bus, but I think it also led to a lot of short-term thinking and overoptimization and eventually I think it led to book-cooking and unethical behavior that got them into trouble. And that's one of the fears with not living with the results of the decisions you make today and their implications for five to ten years down the road. In the software business, as we all know, the investment we make in R&D and sales and marketing today in new initiatives probably aren't going to pay off for about seven to ten years. 

**Jeff Bender :** So that's probably an area where you and I are not as aligned as we might be on some other topics. How do you think about individuals as they come up wanting to do more and different things, but in order to be able to do those things they might have to be separated from some of these decisions. 

**Mark Leonard :** The way I handle that, as you know, is that I don't take people out of a position where they own something, I just create situations where they own more stuffs. And so, you were responsible for Harris the original utility business, and you are now responsible for so much more. And that only works if the people have the capacity to keep on going. But if I take in you and convince you to go off and run Jonas, where I need managers there, and leave Harris behind, I think we would have lost something into the knowledge that you've built up, into the people, the customers, the products, within the utility space. Which I believe would have been a loss for Harris operating group. 

Now, one of the things that I believe is that ideas and practices travel in people, absolutely. And so, new people can bring new ideas. But I also believe that there's a group of people, and that's not everyone, who are natural consumers and adopters and observers of new ideas. And if you have enough of those, you don't need to bring in people from the outside. Now, I have no objection bringing people in from the outside, but I prefer to bring in doers as opposed to managers, so to speak. People who install processes or help those things happen rather than people who hire, fire, set incentive compensations, things of that nature. And what I find is that when people talk about hiring outsiders, they are really talking about people who bring Pareto processes or digital marketing processes or whatever process it is, they are rarely talking about bringing in technical specialist in a particular round, they are usually talking about bringing in managers. 

**Jeff Bender :** That's very true. So switching a little bit to what I would consider to be sort of one of the foundations of the Constellation and Harris business model, which really is decentralization, autonomy and control typically at the business unit level, being core to our DNA, obviously this originated with you. Where or what experience in your life or in your work experience, where did this come from?

**Mark Leonard :** You are talking about autonomy as a concept?

**Jeff Bender :** yes, a lot of people when we talk, they find our level of decentralization and control that we put at our business units level almost to be extreme and don't really understand why we don't focus on synergies and trying to do a lot more things. I would say that the model that we follow is not very common, or well-understood when we try to explain it. 

**Mark Leonard :** It starts with a personal preference. I don't like anyone telling me what to do. I love being convinced, I love changing my mind, it's the neatest feeling in the world to have someone take you from your position in which you are entrenched and you believe that you understand your position, and have you be convinced otherwise through a rational process. I get a little tingle when that happens it's wonderful. But I don't like anyone saying "I am an authority figure and you will do it this way." I can barely think of anything that annoys me more. And that's just upbringing. I grew up, I got struck by the principles, I challenged teachers, I left home early, I had a bootleg radio license, I built a flamethrower, I did things that were not acceptable to lots of people. And that ability to choose what I think is right and to defend that position if I can is something I prize highly. I love those license plates, "live free or die". And so I hope that we've been able to attract people who feels similarly. I certainly see an incredibly sense of independence among the people with whom I work directly.  I don't know if you feel there's a lot of sycophancy around that manager table, Jeff, but I certainly don't think so.

**Jeff Bender :** I can't remember, we've been working together for more than twenty years, i would have to think really hard and I can't think of any occasion where you told me to do something. You will often try to persuade me and you will provide me with evidences or suggestions and recommend conversations with others, to try to get me to see things differently, to use a different lens, for sure, but i cannot say that you told me to do something. And whether we are a small business or when we are now the size that we are, my question is then, does it upset you though, that I probably don't live it the same way that you do? I do believe in autonomy and decentralization, and I do try to empower our leaders to take their own decisions and to learn, and you can sometimes let them fail and learn from the sticks, but there will be an occasion where I will step in and require them to do something, or perhaps they will feel that I am not giving them an alternative, maybe i am pretending that I am but I am not... does it bother you that I don't always live the same way you do?

**Mark Leonard :** Not at all. And that's self-serving on my part. So if you do something different, and Mark Leonard does something different, and Dexter does something different, we are always in a position where, if it works, we're all gonna know. You are going to share. And that experimental approach to life is one that makes for a much healthier whole. Evolution is a natural process. Some things are going to work, some aren't, if you're not experimenting, if you're not trying to do things differently, we aren't going to discover the right way forward. So I am delighted that you are trying different things and you don't necessarily sign up for the whole package. 

**Jeff Bender :** I was actually going to transition into experimentation and best practices, and I think, you know, we look across, one of our core strengths is our ability to share best practices, not only with the businesses within Harris Group but also across CSI. And I think I just like the fact that when it comes to deploying our capital, there's definitely a level of competition amongst the operating groups. When it comes to that I think we are still doing a really good job of still sharing our best practices. To your point, what works, what doesn't work, i think that's been our core strength. I keep fighting to make sure that we keep doing that. Do you think that we do a good job of sharing best practices? When you stand back and you look at what we're actually doing, do you believe we are still doing it like we used to?

**Mark Leonard :** First, the nature of our best practices is really important. When Newton discovered physical laws, those could be replicated everywhere, in every geography, in every time. But when we try to discover best practices, when we try to replicate them, in different geographies or different times, or in different industries, they don't always work. You can't always replicate them. Much of what we do is context sensitive, it doesn't apply. It may send you off in the right direction, but you can't apply it like a law. And so our best practices are vague and fuzzy recipes that send you into a particular direction. You can't put them in a three-ring binder and ship them off to Brazil. And hence, I'd much rather like them travel in the form of "Why don't you talk to so-and-so over this particular business unit about that particular thing". And so some of my time is spent with Robin saying "You know we got approached by a supplier who wants to put up the prices by ten times of software components that we use, how should we handle that, who should we talk to?" And I'll reach out to some people and I will try to find someone for him, often by phoning you who will answer with "Well why don't you talk to so-and-so...", etc. 

So that sort of organic, "Have you seen a situation like this before, it looks like this, here is someone to talk with" is how we often share best practices. And it's because of the nature of the best practices we are sharing. Now, does that get harder as you get bigger? Yes absolutely. And do you need to invest even more in providing networking and contacts and institutional knowledge to people, yes. Now, the fact that I can't connect Robin who has one of this issues in one of his business units directly with someone inside of Dexter's unit who has this issue doesn't bother me hugely, because I know that within Robin's unit there'll be some advice from some business unit that will help that person. 

And so the fact that the network gets a bit frail as you get a bit bigger doesn't mean that the units inside of TSS, Robin's unit, aren't as strong as they were inside of the whole of Constellation ten years ago. So I still think we can have robust best-practice activities in our smaller portfolios or operating groups that are as good as they ever were and things that filter through you and me, Jeff, would just be fewer. And hopefully there will be bigger issues and more important things that we can actually help with.

**Jeff Bender :** I do spend my time on connecting people, like you said, talk to so-and-so, have you seen so-and-so, I find that I spend more time there than I have in the past. I find it rewarding when you link the people together and you follow up on the conversations it can be quite impactful for sure. 

So you've done a bunch of research that you've shared with certainly myself and my peers and also with the Constellation board of directors on HPCs, or *High Performance Conglomerates*. In the form of "What can we learn from others, who sort of at least have the organization structure that we have." So why bother study what others have done if they're not all in Vertical Market Software?

**Mark Leonard :** I think I studied about a dozen of these conglomerates and the neat thing is that one of them was actually a vertical market software company, it was Jack Henry, it still is. And the other one, Roper, was busy becoming a Vertical Market Software company. So, to have the twelve best High Performance Conglomerates in the world, two of them end up as Vertical Market Software companies is pretty damn remarkable. And so it speaks to the fact that this is an inherently good business. 

That said, the other ten or so were not VMS High Performance Conglomerates, they were just in other industries and businesses. And the reason I studied them is to try to figure out how we as Constellation are going to evolve. If there's an obvious group of companies that I can look to, that showed the way and that had many many acquisitions that had continued to be successful over time, i would have gone to them. This is just where I would have ended up, I couldn't find anyone that could look more like us, within our industry.

**Jeff Bender :** Was there a learning that crosses many of them that surprised you most? 

**Mark Leonard :** It's not something that is unique to them, but it's sort of the reversion to the mean thing, this is a concept that people talk about all the time, when you get exceptional performance, it tends to diminish over time towards mean performance. And we certainly saw that in all of the High Performance Conglomerates. They all started out with extraordinary return on capital once they figured out what they were doing, and then gradually over time their return on capital started to diminish.

**Jeff Bender :** So you mentioned Jack Henry. What is it about them that impresses you the most? I remember when I first joined Harris you were talking about Jack Henry, so that's a long long time ago.

**Mark Leonard :** Yes, in fact Bernie wrote a piece on Jack Henry back then when you joined, that we still have lying around, which is kind of fun to go back and look at. When I was on a road trip, at one step I met Jack, as he was a very old and sick man and I had the opportunity to have dinner with him at his house. He was a character and very kind when he was in such a state. 

The thing I love about Jack Henry, and is startling even today, is that they compete in an industry where the customer base has become much much less over time. Probably half the number of financial institutions in the United States now compared to when we first looked at them. Despite that, they have grown their revenues, profits, earnings per share, shareholder value at a remarkable rate since the eighties, early eighties I believe when they went public. So that's an incredible track record. 

**Jeff Bender :** Now one of the things that they typically do, I think they have done a better job that we have, is that they've been using their channels, their existing customers, to basically purchase add-on products or potentially service offerings, and then take that into their existing customer base.  Would you talk about that? Certainly my comment might be more Harris specific, we haven't done that as often as I think I would like to see us do. Any sort of sense do you think why we don't do that more often? It seems, from a return perspective, like something where we should be spending more time? Any sense why you think we might struggle with doing that?

**Mark Leonard :** I'm thinking that you could identify right away three or four companies in the utility software space, that you would like to own if price were no object. And I don't think that Jack Henry let price be an object. So they paid up for the acquisitions that they bought. And because they paid up, they had to have synergies. They had to do cross-selling. They had to achieve some things with those assets that when we take our capital, and go out and invest it in a new vertical that isn't utilities, we don't have to do. And if you look at Constellation's results, we generate a higher return on capital than Jack Henry does. Now if we were seeing lower returns on capital across the board or if we used a lower hurdle rate, I believe we would own more utility software businesses. Because I think you would have stretched and found a way and driven for synergies and cross-selling and all those other things, to enable you to be more strategic about what you do, as opposed to more opportunistic about what you do. You would have ended up in less verticals, you would have had lower returns on capital but you probably would have built within utilities a higher market share business with a larger moat around it than your existing businesses, that are still pretty extraordinary businesses. Is that a fair reflection?

**Jeff Bender :** Yes. But then do you consider Jack Henry to be less disciplined deployers of capital than we are? I guess when you look at pure returns the answer is simple, the answer is yes, but the question is who is creating the most value?

**Mark Leonard :** I think we have created more value, by a long shot. But they have created astonishing amounts of value, returned a lot of capital to shareholders. We haven't returned a lot of capital to shareholders, I mean it is not trivial, but we have redeployed more capital.

**Jeff Bender :** Yes, it is interesting, this concept of "What would the business look like", how deep would the moat actually be if we would have used a different approach. And I do agree with you that they would be much deeper, more diversified. But as a consequence, the returns would likely be lower. That's a very interesting way to look at it. 

That's probably a good segway into what I think will be of a lot of interests for many of our businesses, which is this profitability-organic growth trade-off, something that we often speak about. You have written before, I think it is a quote from one of the Letters to Shareholders, that you believe that organic growth is one of the toughest management challenge in software. So why do you believe that?

**Mark Leonard :** It started out with my experience in the venture business where we were looking to create new businesses, new markets, new products, and it proved incredibly difficult. We then, inside of Constellation, we did an empirical study of our own initiatives over a five-year period, and we demonstrated to ourselves that we, too, were doing a poor job of deploying capital in new initiatives. I knew it was tough, but it wasn't until I came across Philip Tetlock's research that I understood why it was tough. 

So Tetlock is the most famous researcher in the area of forecasting. He wrote a book and I hate the name of the book because it sounds hype, it is called *Super-forecasters*. But I love his research, which I had came across before his book. And his original PhD took forever because he followed a series of gurus and forecasters and people who claim to be visionaries and know the future, who were making statements publicly, that he could then track as the accuracy of their forecasts and visions. And these were economists, they were political analysts, they were all kinds of people, and eventually when he managed to compile all the research,  he published an article that got a fair amount of press along with his PhD. The average guru was not better than a dart-throwing chimp at forecasting the future. And as his profile and the people got to know him, the US government took an interest in his research and provided him with significant funding to extend his work on forecasting, which he did. And that led to a lot of the work that is in his *Super-forecasters* book, and the outcome of that is that it turns out there is a tiny group of people who are capable of good forecasts. 

Now it is important to understand what Tetlock means by good forecast and the kind of people that are good forecasters. And I won't go into that here, but if you are tempted it is definitely a good book to read. You can also find some good articles that encapsulate what's in the book. The main finding that you won't find advertised in a lot of places because it is not the main thesis of his book, but has tremendous relevance for us, is that even the good forecasters - his super forecasters - can do a good job in, maybe two years, maybe three years? But there are no super forecasters who can forecast in five, ten years. They don't exist.

So, visionaries are people who either say a lot of different things and one of them works out, and then they get known for it, or they're the kind of person that says something outlandish, and we happen to have an outlandish event, and then they become known as visionary. 

Unless you have this ability to see far into the future, how do you make long-term investments? It's incredibly difficult stuff, and the most obvious way you can do it is by listening very closely to your customers. So instead of you making forecasts, you let your customers be your co-developers. And that's one of the ways that we have been able to improve what we do on the initiatives side, we have a variety of techniques that we use for doing so. 

One of the High Performance Conglomerates that we studied was Illinois Tool Works, and it took co-development to the extreme, working with clients to actually get patents, jointly that were own by ITW and the client. So co-development is one of the great ways to develop products that you know will have market, rather than just forecasting. You know that there will be demand for them. 

**Jeff Bender :** And do you think there is a reason why, or do you think there is something we could do better to support our leaders in our businesses to be willing to take more risk to find these potential ways to drive organic growth? Realizing that this is not going to be decision today, growth tomorrow scenarios? I am struggling with that, I am just trying to get people to think a bit more longer term and be willing to make some of the shorter-term tradeoffs to be able to drive it. I think it gets harder and harder, as a business grows, and even realizes a little bit of success, it becomes less risky, more risk averse. 

**Mark Leonard :** Yes. You and I and various other people, Mark Miller had a big hand in this, have come up with some rules of thumb. One is that you need a full time champion for a particular initiative. It can't be something that people do in their part-time, otherwise making the quarter becomes the overriding priority and they never come around working on the initiative. I am as guilty of this as anyone. I have a dozen initiatives running personally. And I always get wrapped into the treadmill of quarterly stuffs. 

So having dedicated champions and dedicated teams is the best way to go about this, and then separating the financials, for those dedicated initiatives from your core business. So that you core profitability is still obvious and is still the everyday concern of whoever is running those core activities, that's an important part of what we do and try to do. 

Now one of the problems is that initiatives that are small don't easily fall into this paradigm of full-time initiative champion and a separate team who can work on the initiative. So there is a certain minimum scale that you need to take this kind of approach so that it works well. The idea of running initiatives with  five percent of your time or ten percent of your time or twenty percent of your time, you know, "this is Friday therefore I work on initiatives", I haven't seen it work anywhere. I have heard people talk about it, but I haven't heard that it is a permanent and satisfactory process. 

**Jeff Bender :** I agree with you, we call it the grind of the business, it sucks away most of that oxygen for any of this type of things if you are not focused on it. I often talk to our leaders and our employees about, you know, you wake up in the morning, you are going to be a lot more successful if you know what you are focusing on. So I think this applies to initiatives as well. Waking up in the morning and asking what am I supposed to do today, that can be a much less effective way to go about doing things if you are trying to achieve something specific or something that takes more than a few cycles of time, for sure. 

**Mark Leonard :** I think it will be fascinating to observe Topicus, the company that TSS is just buying. This is a company that has over a thousand employees, that has grown organically without outside capital, largely through initiatives. And so trying  to understand it better is one of my high priorities over the course of the next year or two. And share some of these best practices if possible and encourage some of their key managers  to contribute ideas and approaches to the rest of Constellation. 

**Jeff Bender :** I think that having Robin and his team, in a relatively short period of time - i guess it is not that short anymore, they have been around for a while - I have always been so impressed by his willingness to embrace best practices and share them. Even to this day, i'd say, they still do one of the best job across Constellation of sharing best practices, having their readers attend, and interact with other businesses. And that has been very helpful for us for sort of developing our M&A business development functions, they have been more than willing to share what they have been doing, what's working, what hasn't, "you might not want to try to do this, cause we have and it did not work that well"... If anybody can grab that value, which has been tremendous for all of us, I think Robin and his team are a great group to do that. 

And so speaking of Robin and his team, and I will also say Mark and his team at Volaris, what are these other things that I think we have talked about, you know you and I may not be fully aligned, is that the data set does not fully support smaller size businesses. So basically that means that a business unit, if it scales, somewhat reduce, and therefore potentially then you need to be breaking up larger business units into one or two or several smaller business units. Versus the opposite of folding smaller ones in,  why do you think that's so important? And obviously I think that both Mark at Volaris and then Robin at TSS, have done some really great things at breaking up some of their larger businesses into smaller businesses, and seen some great results. So why do you believe, what is your sense as to why small is better than large?


**Mark Leonard :** My early experience is in the venture business and if you go back even further it relates to my experience playing team sports. I adored team sports. To me it was life changing when I got to school and started playing team sports. I love that environment, I love the level of intensity that came out of it, I love great coaches who could extract extraordinary performance from a bunch of relatively inept players such as myself. 

And when I got into the venture business, it was almost expected that people would be investing themselves into their job at a level of energy and enthusiasm that you just don't see inside of your average corporation. Except in a few highly motivated ambitious general managers or sales people. That sort of all-hands-on-deck, the whole team trying to help things succeed, that you see in the average venture bank company, I saw in some of the early businesses at Constellation. Trapeze for instance was like that. 

And I no longer see that in any of our businesses. I told the story of turning up at one of our early meeting at one of our businesses, and getting in there, and sitting in the carols waiting for the managers to arrive, and listening to the chat amongst the employees that they drifted in. And they weren't coming early and they weren't buckling down and they weren't excited about work but I certainly got to hear about their personal lives. And it was just so different from the early days of Volaris, of Trapeze, and the intensity was so diminished I was so disappointed. 

And I am convinced it is a function of size. A reversion to the mean. You are not gonna have those high performance teams when you get extremely large. Those are personal observations and there is some really good research. When you want to look at high-output teams, there has been research done since the 1800s on this topic. What you see is that as you add people to a team, you get diminishing output per person. And there are terms for this like social slacking and things of that nature. And when you have complex work activities that require coordination between teams, there are other factors that diminish output per team member. Communication overhead is an example. It is a (N-1)!, where N is the number of nodes in the network, the amount of communication overhead grows close to geometrically, if you add people to the team. And from what we can see over time, technology has not been particularly good at making team size increase effectively.

Then there are some empirical observations on efficient team size, if you look at Agile teams in the software world, what you'll find is that teams of maybe six to twelve, five to ten are most common. And that seems to be the right sort of span for teams. Now you can obviously stack five-persons team one over another and have one person from the team above oversee the team below, etc. And that for sure works, but what happens is that the distance from the top of the stack to the bottom of the stack becomes increasingly large. So the knowledge of what's happening in the field becomes increasingly distant. And the empathy between the field person and the person at the top of the stack becomes increasingly distant. And I just feel that if you get much beyond this limit of around fifty to a hundred, you start substituting systems for knowledge, and systems for empathy. And systems by their very nature tend to be very bureaucratic and one-size-fits-all. 

And so you start not looking forward working with the slightly stunted but enthusiastic and perhaps brilliant average employee, and start working instead with the ideal employee who is a figment of your imagination because they don't exist. 

And you end up with the sort of lowest common denominator ideal employee, which leaves an awful lot of untapped resources in the organization. So once again this isn't particularly research-backed, but I am personally willing to trade off the inefficiencies of not having larger scale, for the autonomy of a small tight, agile team. I don't know if this is an instance where I have confirmation bias but I have a feeling that within Topicus what we're gonna find is that a lot of the initiatives that have been the drivers of success and the growth of that business have been relatively small teams, that over time become big to take advantage of the opportunity, but in the early throws of the opportunity development had a few extraordinary people in small teams. 

**Jeff Bender :** So the trade off you mention when talking about efficiency, is that profitability that you are trading off? Or just overall market size, market share? What is the trade-off, what is the inefficiency?

**Mark Leonard :** The inefficiency is probably of market size for a particular... well, here is an example of how I would take a market of X size, if you run it with one business unit, I think you would probably get higher margins, and higher revenues per person, and the market would grow at X rate.  If you took this same market and addressed it with three business units, my gut feeling is that you would get lower margins, but you eventually end up addressing more needs of the market place. And so you end up with gross revenues that would be higher, you'd have lower revenues per person, and lower margins. But I think you grow faster, you build a better moat, and you'll have more long-term revenues. 

**Jeff Bender :** Got it. That's very interesting actually. Jerry actually just did something with one of our larger healthcare businesses where we broke two pieces of it off, and actually brought in a new EVP to create a new business. But like you said, the short term consequences are the lower profitability, but the long-term is giving this new business the oxygen and the ability to grow and to try and do something and not be weighted down by the larger business structure. 

With that I am going to wrap it up and thank you very much for so much of your time today. I really appreciated that. Thank you for your very thoughtful and considerate answers and thank you very much.

**Mark Leonard :** It was great to do it Jeff and always looking forward to talking, admittedly indirectly with your employees, and I encourage any of the managers that report to you to reach out to me if you'd like to have a similar sort of conversation about any topic really. 