
The elegant stores of Hermes occupy prime locations in major cities worldwide and the brand is synonymous with prestige. The company's origins are more commonplace, as its evocative logo hints. Thierry Hermes started the business as a harness and saddlery workshop in Paris in 1837. You can still buy a Hermes saddle today, along with a repertoire of celebrated products such as handbags, silk scarves, ties and perfumes. Nearly two centuries later, the business is still majority-owned and led by Thierry's descendants, who have imbued the current corporate culture with a transcendent long-term focus.

Now operating from over 300 shops, significant global expansion occurred under the long-term leadership of Jean-Louis Dumas Hermes, who designed the Birkin bag after a brief encounter with the actress on a flight from Paris to London in 1984. As with all Hermes products, the Birkin bag is expensive and can cost you tens of thousands of dollars. At the lower end of the price range, silk ties will set you back $180. Throughout the product line, pricing is not only ultra-premium compared to ordinary brands, but also premium compared over other luxury brands. 

What explains the [[Pricing Power]]? For one, product quality is exceptional. All the leather goods, nearly half of the total product line, are made in France by skilled craftsmen with years of training. Other luxury brands increasingly outsource production of leather goods to low-cost countries. Some items, including Birkin and Kelly bags, are fabricated by a single artisan toiling up to 20 hours per item. Whether leather or silk, only the finest materials are used, and the company has cultivated exclusive relationships with the best tanneries and silk merchants to secure supply. 

Image is crucial. Hermes products are classically stylish, not modish. In fact, the company still uses saddle-stitching in its wares, a technique perfected in 1918 by the grandson of Thierry Hermes when he launched a fine line of leather goods and luggage. To control brand image tightly, more than 80% of sales are made through company-owned stores in choice locations (the rest being mostly made through international airport concessions). Exterior design and interior layout of the stores are an extension of the brand and a key point of communication with the consumer. Exceptional service levels are sustained though extensive training of sales associates.

Scarcity reinforces pricing power. Hermes invests in building production capacity, such as training new craftsmen, to support growth, but bot to an extent  that has fully eliminated bottlenecks. It is believed that there are waiting lists for some Hermes products open to regular customers. For some of the most desirable products, these waiting lists can be up to to four years long. Pent-up demand results, which also deepens a relatively opaque - but very high - pricing structure. Many stores offer a unique assortment of goods, heightening a sense of urgency to buy. The genuine rarity of some items makes them collectors items, such as a fuchsia crocodile Hermes Birkin bag that recently sold for $223'000 at a Christie's auction in Hong Kong. 

Hermes has a high degree of control over the distribution of its products, thanks to its own-store network, giving it complete authority over pricing. Hermes products are almost never discounted. Price increases are common and always at least in line with general price inflation. The price elasticity of demand is negligible, reflecting the perverse fact that the more expensive a luxury item gets, the more desirable it becomes (see [[Veblen goods]]).

The combination of these features gives Hermes unmatched pricing power. The benefits are reflected in Hermes compelling financial characteristics: cash flows are strong and predictable thanks to operating margins exceeding 30%; return on invested capital exceeds 30%; the compound annual growth rate of sales during the past two decades is 11%, with the worst year in the period being 4% in 2009. The company's financial performance marks it exceptional, mirroring its heritage, history of creativity, and commitment to quality. 