# Home Depot Pro vs DIY Customer Behaviour

by #InPractise 

\-Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### We've owned Home Depot for a while and I know the housing industry pretty well, but the thing that we find so attractive about Home Depot is their pro business, so I have a number of questions around that. Home Depot said, in their most recent call, that pro is now 50% of their revenue, how should we think about the difference between traffic and ticket behavior for pro versus do-it-yourself consumers? They report these on a blended basis but we know the behaviors of these two groups is quite different, so how should we think about those two differences in terms of traffic and ticket?

I recently departed from Home Depot but while I was there for seven years, I was a director in merchandising and had a chance to have my hands directly on all three of Home Depot's core merchandising categories, hard lines, building materials and décor, with sub-departments such as paint, flooring and appliances under each of those macro departments. As much spotlight that DIY gets in this space, pro is the strategic customer you want to win. Lowe's for Pros are also trying to build in that space. The Q4 results exceeded expectations, but keeping in mind the virus, the stat we use at Home Depot a lot is that 4% of our foot traffic accounts for half our business. From a store experience perspective, you have two stores together. You have your pro desk, lumber, and separate check-outs and parking for pro. Those departments like lumber, building material and concrete and bagged goods are on one side of the store, and garden, refrigerators, paint and flooring on the other. From both a traffic and a sales perspective, for that small percentage of customers versus DIY, there are unique problems to solve.

The primary problem to solve for the pro is, do we have enough quantity? We have this expression at Depot, JLQ - job lot quantities. You want to ensure you have the brands pros want and the job lot quantities they need. The DIY side is a different problem which is, I cannot find stuff. The average Home Depot DIY customer shops Depot three or four times a year and spends $75 on average. The average pro comes into Depot three or four times a month, and not at the same times. At 6:00AM before jobs start, the pro desk is humming, then there's a lull at 8:00AM or 9:00AM, and another rush between 10:00AM and 12:00PM. Not only is it lunch but they've run out of stuff. I would forecast the pro spend to get higher in the next three to five years.

M&A activity for Depot included HD Supply last year and Interline three years ago. If you do the customer segmentation around DIY and pro, there are still sub-segments, such as beginner and heavy DIY, or light and heavy pro. The DIY and light pro are well-covered, but that heavy pro home builder doing five million plus, a plumber who has a million or two in bookings every year, versus a plumbing company who has 20 to 30 million a year, are completely different pros. We talk a lot about share of wallet publicly. For every dollar a pro contractor spends, 25 cents end up at Home Depot. Where else are they getting some of those things? You start looking at distributors which is why M&A activity makes sense; Grainger, Fastenal, Ferguson and other industrial distributors, but Interline and HD Supply are also in that mix. I expect Lowe's and Home Depot to lean heavily into pro in the coming years.

### Pro makes up 4% of customers and do-it-yourself visit three to four times a year, so 96% of customers visit 4 times a year, how many times does the average pro customer visit monthly or annually?

The average home owner probably ends up in a Depot two to three times a year, but for the average pro it depends on the business. I would say, two or three times per month, but what differs is the volume. In those weeks when I have worked the pro desk, I saw the same customers multiple times a day. I was surprised at the camaraderie; when you are in a store multiple times in a given week, you become friends. It is very collegial, they know you by name, unlike the other side of the store which has no loyalty program, making it very difficult to identify DIY customers.

### In 2022, Home Depot reported 1.8 billion transactions at a $83 average ticket price; what percentage of the transactions are pro versus do it yourself?

Not looking at dollar value or units, 30% to 35% of the transactions. Most DIY customers come in for gardening or small light projects, where the dollar value is insignificant. Home Depot pushes everyday low price to its customer daily and also have many off shelf merchandising and promotions any week of the year.

### 4% of customers visit more frequently and make up a third of transactions; do you think $75 a ticket is a reasonable estimate for do it yourself or is it perhaps lower than that if the average is $83?

I would say it's lower than that. Home Depot is a unique retailer where customers typically visit for projects, not products. No one buys a vanity only, they will include a faucet, lighting, paint and flooring. Most transactions are on the smaller side but once you average that out, some folks spend 30 grand on a kitchen remodel which counts as one transaction. If you took out the top and bottom 10%, the average wouldn't be as high as $83.

### Is that due to large pro purchases?

Yes. We have pro sales associates who linger around the pro desk, but we also have another role called a PAR, or pro account representative, typically affiliated to a store. They are at the store but work behind the scenes, proactively identifying and assisting top pro customers, like an account representative at the store level. The culture at Home Depot when it comes to large sales is pretty competitive. Stores compete with each other in a district, and districts compete in a region and regions compete, even at the department level like plywood versus pressure treated merchants. From a sales perspective, I don't feel like $83 is walking out every time I look at transactions.

### I read Built from Scratch, and that friendly but competitive culture shone through.

I have three copies.

### It's a great book. Over the last two years, do-it-yourself customers splurged on home improvement during shelter in place, and with big stimulus checks it makes sense that the spend within do-it-yourself was pull forward. You are seeing declining do-it-yourself traffic levels at Lowe's, who recently said it was positive, but it is flat at best. Pro customers were constrained because they couldn't get permits and people didn't want them to come into their home, pre-vaccines, so thinking about growth trajectory going longer, is there pull forward within pro, or has pro stepped up and can grow off this level, or are we well above trend, even within pro?

Your last comment there is important, you have to look at it over five years, because then you start to see the significance of what is currently happening. It's important to double click into pro if we're talking about painters, roofers or kitchen remodelers, but overall, the demand is still very strong and I'm bullish in the space. A new base line has been set in most product categories. If Home Depot grew 20% overall on average in 2020, then eyeballs are on 2021. Did we pull so forward that, in 2021, we're starting to see some negatives?

I don't anticipate any slow down due to several macro factors which are relevant that will drive this. Work from home, the latest stat I saw was that 30% of office workers are back in the office. That means there are still a significant amount of folks who are hybrid which means they are still at home more than Saturday and Sunday. That's not the same as locked in your house, but if you're home more we will see some of that tailwind driving demand. With real estate inventory being low and the prices being where they are, people are looking more at repair and remodel activity, as opposed to moving. I got an email from Zillow saying my house grew 16% last year, and experts anticipate mid to high single digit growth in 2022 for your home. All of those add up to, I am willing to spend more on different projects. Garden, decking, BBQ, sheds and back yard stuff is our top selling department. Not that faucets and mill work are pushovers, but garden is number one which is a big deal. There is a 72-day lead time for a refrigerator, washer or drier at Home Depot today, for something you spend a couple grand on so there are other factors involved, but tailwinds will drive pro activity for 2022 and 2023.

From an inventory perspective aside from lumber, most categories are doing well and Home Depot has been very public around their strategy of vendor redundancy. If we are out of stock of one item from one vendor, we will go to our backup vendors. If everybody is out of stock, we will go to new vendors, to ensure the customer gets what they need. From a tailwind perspective, stocks, inflation and commodity pricing are important. As a manufacturer, when the price of steel or lumber is 5X, it blows out the economics in terms of how am I able to manufacture this item per our agreements. When you have an unexpected price increase, who absorbs that cost? That is also part of the dynamics but when you focus on that pro customer traffic, the tailwinds have a net greater effect than the headwinds. I keep coming back to Home Depot's constant messaging of how important the pro is operationally, ensuring we are solving pro issues. M&A activity is also very pro focused.

### That was helpful, I have a good handle on the behaviors of classic small pro contractors who run in at lunch to pick up a part and come back, but I would like to better understand the behaviors of larger pros. On the most recent call, Home Depot talked about pro customers who spend $300,000 a year on job lot orders; instead of five doors for a house, they order 150 doors. This relates to the MRO customers where I have less understanding, because Home Depot is in question, not HD Supply. Could you talk about that category and why Home Depot is successfully getting more of that business and if they can get a lot more in future. If you talk about market share gains, it seems winning $300,000 customers is more important that those who spend $5,000?

Home Depot is not where it wants to be but they are certainly making inroads. When you think about the light pro versus heavy pro, price and service levels are two of four critical factors for Home Depot to continue winning and earning business from that heavy pro. Distributors don't have 400,000 associates or 2,300 store overhead, so customer experience isn't their thing. They offer you a catalog, you choose and they get you the best price possible. 40% profit margin is the directional rule, whether it is a house plant, faucet or paint brush. If you buy one door, 40% is correct but if you buy 150 doors, how much margin erosion are you willing to take on to pass that value onto customers? If that customer buys 150 doors, next year that could easily grow into 200 or 400 doors, so you also want to grow with them.

One of the benefits of having a distributor is that smaller number of customers, so they can follow up directly and know what you need, so service is key. Then comes delivery. Home Depot can deliver one or 10 doors but do they have the capability to deliver 150 doors? That is a different type of supply chain, but with the muscle that they have, I'm sure they'll figure it out. They have recently opened several bulk BDCs where the flatbeds simply roll in, load up and roll out. I am talking about major quantities of large items, but they are not yet country wide.

The fourth piece is value added services, because we are way past simply providing a product. Some of the value-added services we might provide pros is payment terms, account management and helping them grow their business. Home Depot has a pro mobile app and a pro website, which looks different to the generic DIY homedepot.com. Home Depot is still a business where the merchants and the overall company is measured on margin. Why would a national home builder or a larger pro in your region or municipality switch from their existing supplier base? You have to ensure the value you create is greater than the cost. 90% of America lives within 10 miles of a Home Depot, so it's incredibly convenient, but I will not spend the majority of my dollars there because of the price.

### That makes sense. Let's talk about Lowe's efforts to win pro and what are the main barriers to them winning share versus Home Depot. They can both win pro business without eating each other's market share, because there is a lot of empty white space, but what advantages do they have in pulling that off over time?

When talking about the Lowe's for Pros initiatives, number one is assortment. We sell a lot of the same types of items, but the actual items we sell are very different. Take the power tools category, for example, and look at the brands Lowe's has. Cobalt is middle tier at best and I have yet to see a heavy-duty pro choose Cobalt as their default tool, but you also have some SPD at Lowe's, such as DeWalt, which will be heavier focused towards pros, simply from a branding perspective. Craftsman is not a pro brand, and any one of those will make a hole in your wall, but a pro will not put their livelihood and ability to feed their family into a Craftsman or Cobalt tool. Home Depot have an exclusive relationship with TTI and Milwaukee is the number one pro brand for power tools. Another popular brand on the pro side is Rigid, which is a private label, also contract manufactured by TTI. Rigid unto itself is so loved by the pros and it has a lifetime warranty. Pros also adopted Makita, also exclusive to Home Depot. We do sell DeWalt, but you have to walk down six bays to get it. Apply that same logic to paint and other categories in the store. Lowe's will have an uphill battle to attract the same pros.

I feel from a pricing perspective we will beat Lowe's. Both firms currently have tool rental but Lowe's business is still in its infancy, having announced it merely three or four years ago. We have the tools which pros need on the job; they are expensive but they don't need to buy it. With loyalty you have Pro Xtra versus MVP from Lowe's. Head-to-head they have comparable cash back or earn free stuff – I would call it relatively even – but in terms of adoption and which is more likely to be chosen by a pro, I would give the edge to Home Depot.

Location is also important from a pro perspective. Both Lowe's and Home Depot have almost 2,000 locations, but there have been several studies around Home Depot's more convenient locations which are more central to where work is happening. If you were to spend all week as a fly on the wall at a pro desk, you would see phone orders. Typically, what happens is that towards the middle of the day, job sites start running out of supplies and send a runner, who picks up the supplies they need. They call it a phone order because the runner doesn't pay and has to ultimately get the business owner or project manager to pay. Home Depot has to call that foreman or owner and say, John is at the store about to purchase $400 of concrete, are we good, because I'm about to bill your credit card?

Some interesting innovation has happened like text to approve, where instead of hopping on a phone, the store can send a text where it becomes as easy as clicking yes on your phone versus having to find and wait for them to get approval. Often we cannot talk to the foreman at that precise moment, so you see a cluster of runners, with massive product, waiting for their foreman or the business owner to approve. The level of investment and enterprise focus specifically on the pro will continue to increase that delta.

Yesterday they announced Lowe's University and before that it was a partnership with Petco for pet food. Those are not for the pro, even though all those movements are good for retail and the brand. From a business perspective, I have such a healthy respect for what Lowe’s are doing, even from Marvin and his leadership team. Home Depot is continuing to focus on the brands pros want. Maybe this is anecdotal, but when I walk Lowe's stores every week, I always walk by the pro desk, and it always feels like nobody is around. The middle of the day, at 11:00AM, the pro desk is quiet, which has not been my experience at a typical Home Depot.

### Home Depot doesn't comment on pro versus do-it-yourself trends, but Lowe's typically talk about what the comps were for pro, so how far could an investor go wrong by assuming Lowe's pro comps were the same as Home Depot's, not over a five-year period but quarter to quarter, over the course of a year or two?

How do you identify who the pro is versus the DIY? Nothing against the company I used to work for, but I'm on the pro list and, for some reason, my website defaults to pro. In other words, I am a pro when it comes to Home Depot, when I know that's not the case. Where do you draw the line of who you include in that? I know why Home Depot doesn't and could understand why Lowe's would, but being on the inside, how do you tell the difference? With Home Depot's Pro Xtra loyalty program, you specifically identify yourself as a pro, so that is a clear black and white segregation, bit even in our world, many trades people would not associate with being pro.

In terms of the spend, how far could you go wrong with that? It's a data point I might take under advisement, but I wouldn’t bet the farm on it. You could go significantly wrong using those numbers, but it is not only Lowe's. We rely on HIRI, the Home Improvement Research Institute. They are a non-profit but you have to pay to be a member, and they provide market research data on all things home improvement. They estimate market share and talk about brands and Home Depot is covered a lot in their research. Knowing what the confidence is and looking at what HIRI presents, they are off by lots, and this is a well-respected professional organization. If they say Depot has 30% and Lowe's has 28% in flooring and décor, directionally that is still helpful to see what somebody else thought, but on the actual side, I constantly notice they are totally off. Whether it's Lowe's business or a third party where their livelihood depends on the accuracy of their research, you are still off.

### That makes sense. Home Depot has done a great job optimizing the productivity of their stores and have built very few stores for a very long time. It looks to me, from a traffic standpoint, it is back to the housing boom peaks from 2006, so I am thinking that the stores must be pretty fully optimized and probably cannot handle that much more traffic. There is also a lot more product not flowing through the stores today than there was in 2006, so how much more room is there to move volumes, ignoring inflation, when will they build more stores or how do you think about that?

Home Depot's growth strategy, for at least the 10 years I've been affiliated, has not been to open up new stores. It has been single digits including Puerto Rico for the past years. As to your question around throughput, efficiency and optimization and how much further we can go, we are only scratching the surface. The parking lot has some cars but there's plenty of room and there remains many places to improve. Today we have high volumes walking our stores and we've tried to do assortment optimization across pro and DIY. More work can be done to further optimize the assortment; we need to actively prune out non-sellers and bring in traffic drivers. Either it's smart home or new innovative brands, but product assortment vitality is critical and will continue to drive traffic. To me that's one possible area to continue moving the needle.

Not every store has a self check-out so there is room, operationally, at the check-out process. The typical Home Depot has five doors, which equates to a lot of labor and check-out possibilities. They have garden, front door, DIY and pro exits and tool rental. That is a lot of places where you have to staff people. Labor costs are increasing, I saw an article yesterday that Target is paying some of their people $25 an hour. You are starting to see less aprons on the floor, so how do we maintain that high traffic and optimize it? There is plenty of upside to still happen on that.

Craig Menear has said our number one problem in our stores is that customers can't find stuff, so how are we thinking through self-serve way finding? Again, the pro typically will not have that because they are frequently in the store, but not so for the home owner who is less familiar with the brand. Keep in mind the physical layout of a Home Depot store is dramatically different across 2,000 stores. We have an expression, if you have been to one Home Depot, you have been to one Home Depot. Paint is in the front in this one, and the back in that one. If you address way finding, you can now help customers self-solve. The self-solve idea is a big theme for Depot, which is only scratching the surface. Self-serve navigation at the macro level, like where is flooring, then at the micro level, what is the difference between laminate and vinyl? We could have a whole conversation on this; there are probably hundreds of things I could come up with in an hour.

Shrink is a big deal for example, how we handle that and if we can reduce shrink by a fraction or two, the upside is major. Interconnected is another one and Home Depot's mobile app has two problems, awareness and adoption. We have signage in the store and associates who will swear by it, I was one of them. The technology in the app includes step by step navigation, or being able to text you locations from .com to your phone when you are in the store. There are many things that will save micro minutes here and there, but again it's just awareness and then adoption. As an interconnected retailer, we are only scratching the surface of what it could be. Your question around how much more upside around efficiency, that's not how I see it. I am more focused on the ocean we could still do, not the ocean we have already crossed to get here.

### Would it be fair to say that while the company has gone back to prior peaks on transaction volume, they're way ahead of that in revenue, but that's inflation and basket size growth. So on a transaction level, that does not signal any pending move to start opening more stores because they already reached 90% of the population and have more room to go with existing stores?

I don't expect to get out of single digits any time soon, not when the strategy is working. Placement is one example. By our front door we have our power aisle, which used to be light bulbs, but with the advent of LED, your light bulb lasts 30 years so light bulb sales decreased. Home Depot maintained traffic by swapping in cleaning. There is a new influx of first-time home buyers as a result of Covid, so the number of repair and remodel projects is poised to continue. I am seeing a lot of macro trends for the industry with Lowe's, Menards, Ace and Home Depot. I was listening to Ace's earnings call the other day and their numbers are frickin’ ace; I've never opened my eyes to Ace but I was looking at some of their .com and same store growth. That is why I'm bullish in this space and feel we're scratching the surface.

A recent article in USA Today stated that 75% of new home owners, who bought during Covid in the past 18 months, regret buying the home. The number one reason was that they underestimated the cost and complexity of home maintenance. This is where opportunity lies. Obviously, you can get your tool from Amazon or Walmart, but what will move the needle from a convenience perspective? Home Depot is not the most convenient place to shop. The other place we can improve is competence. 99.9% of America would not know the difference between a drill and an impact driver, and most home owners need an impact driver, not a drill. We talked a lot about where we could grow from a pro perspective, but where you could grow from a DIY perspective is an ocean's worth.

There's an expression at Home Depot, stack ‘em high, watch them fly. We don't have to have the best customer service; we have a ton of product and anything you put by the front door will sell. From a customer experience, we could probably have another conversation on that, there is a million things where Home Depot can improve to further penetrate that DIY market. I don't think of how far it has come, but where else we could go.

### The company has a transaction-based SG&A labor model, which they can flex based on transactions. Over the past five to 10 years, the growth in transactions has been about the growth in dollar terms of SG&A, so if you keep playing that out and SG&A keeps falling as a percent, how should we think about labor leverage?

The reality is that labor costs will continue to grow. Every store in our chain gets allocated hours by corporate, who determine how many hours that store has for that week. It is typically up to the store manager to allocate those hours accordingly, and it is frowned upon if you go over your hourly budget. Because it's the number one cost and there are algorithms that happen in Atlanta for the chain, it's watched like a hawk in terms of the number of hours you get. But here is the reality; are you basing your hour allocation on transactions or on sales? The trend to veer away from transaction and more around dollar value will continue, which might mean less aprons allocated on the floor.

### Did you say that would mean less aprons on the floor?

It would mean less aprons on the floor, because if you're measuring this based on dollar value instead of transactions, you might say it looks as if our dollar growth is happening in kitchens and we already have somebody there, so I might be able to pull someone away from garden and cut their hours down. If you look at the trend traditionally, you might see some opportunities to trim hours, based on where and when the sales happen, versus purely on transactions.

I want to pivot here because there are several factors which have emerged. With interconnected, we are still in our infancy of allocating hours for picking .com orders we fulfill in store and shelving them at the pick up area. Lockers is also still in its infancy. If a customer lives across the street from a Home Depot and wants to collect their order in the locker, they cannot specifically choose ‘locker’; it is still up to the judgment of the associate of what makes it to a locker or not, despite every store having lockers. Interconnected retail has introduced new roles which will add hours to the store.

One of the other things as well is really thinking through the evolution of our consultative businesses like kitchen remodeling, flooring and mill work. You have people stationed at check-outs and tool rental, but you need them in appliances because customers have questions, so you need that consultative selling; you cannot simply buy flooring, you need to schedule a measure, you need somebody there. There ways we can use technology to rethink how consultative selling happens, which will affect the number of labor hours in the store. Home Depot have opened up two design centers specifically for kitchen, bath and flooring, which are outside showrooms, separated from the big box.

For years, Home Depot said they would not experiment with smaller format stores, which is mostly true. Home Depot Design Centers or HDDC are specifically thinking through the labor-intensive parts of the store, flooring, bath and kitchen, and pulling them out of the big box because that experience doesn't match. One HDDC is in San Diego and the other in Baltimore, Maryland, which I would also put under emerging. The increasing role of digital and interconnected will affect the hours.

The other thing that will affect hours is the changes in supply chain. I already mentioned BDCs, and last year Home Depot opened 150 new supply chain facilities. We have made improvements to our supply chain pro customer, who now has access to brands and volume and delivery times that they never had before. That is part of the investment in supply chain. Think about a big product that takes up a lot of space in the store like roofing, concrete or lumber, if we can commit to same day delivery, I no longer have to carry that much in store. I could give the company back seven bays because now I handle it a different way. What will you do with those seven bays and how will you think through the assortment? There are many emerging trends which will affect labor in the store, which is why it was important for me to bifurcate my answer to your question around labor and transactions.

### You spoke about flooring which brought one more thing to my mind. Floor & Decor seems like an incredibly successful concept. When I drive by them, they look like a small Home Depot flooring store. Why doesn't Home Depot have standalone flooring stores? Is it a super successful concept?

I would disagree with something you mentioned though, that when you do walk in, they don't look like the average Home Depot of 140,000 square feet including garden. The number of square feet we allocate to flooring is still small; maybe 10,000 to 15,000. Keep in mind in that 10,000 square foot space, we're still selling the big five which are laminate, vinyl, tile, hard wood and carpet. The average Floor & Decor store is 40,000 square feet and they only do four; they don't sell carpet. The difference is that Floor & Decor is exclusively import. You will not see Shaw, Mohawk, Armstrong or other national players inside a Floor & Decor. From a labor perspective, everyone is focused on flooring, but the store experience is focused more on the pro flooring installer, more than the home owner. You see many home owners in there, but from a layout and pricing perspective, the store is for installers.

Home Depot wouldn't open a standalone business like that because from a store format perspective, they truly believe there are benefits of being a one stop shop. I am remodeling my kitchen and there's value in being able to pick my paint, appliances, cabinets, counter tops and flooring, all in the same place. The belief is that the additional traffic we get, because they are in the store, is still significant. One of the benefits of Floor & Decor is that all their inventory is on hand. Their displays are giant. Home Depot displays are 12 X 12 foot whereas Floor & Decor have a 3 X 6 foot display, and when you move the display, there are three pallets of that item, unlike at Home Depot where you have to wait three weeks for them to special order and deliver it. That is what I meant from an installer perspective, but the reason Home Depot doesn't open those up has to do with the business model and brand. Do you remember Home Depot Expo Stores?

### Yes.

They were a standalone facility, more on the décor side, and were profitable, drove a lot of traffic and had a great brand, but Home Depot divested from that business because it wasn't core. What you said about Floor & Decor also applies to Sherwin-Williams, who beat us in customer experience and their stock is skyrocketing. You could say that about standalone paint departments or anything else. 20 years ago, Home Depot opened up a store a day, then for a long time we didn't open any stores, and for the past few years we are trickling in single digit stores. The muscle memory to open a store had to be rebuilt. The people who built our stores 20 years ago, in terms of the real estate, quality and roofing teams, had to rebuild the muscle to think through new big boxes again. If you change that up and instead of opening 130,000 square foot you say 40,000, you have to stand up different competencies in the stores. It's a different animal to open up a 30,000 versus 130,000.

That makes sense.

Obviously we could open it, but you're dabbling away from your core.