# How ADC Ponzis prevented defaults

The crudest way to prevent default on an [[ADC loan frauds]] was to refinance the ADC loan. The Ponzi would start the whole game again by self-funding the fees and interest. The problem was that this was easy to spot for auditors and examiners and should have raised warning flags. Remarkably, Arthur Young and Company gave clean opinion to two of the most notorious Texas control frauds, Vernon Savings and Western Savings, even though they routinely refinanced all their ADC loans.

*Cash for Trash* deals are harder to spot because they create seemingly arm's length sales. The best evidence of market value is a recent arm's length sale. A good rule, except when there is fraud. A cash-for-trash deal started with an uncreditworthy borrower asking the S&L for a $3 million ADC loan. The loan officer responds that the S&L will not loan him $3 million, but it will loan him $33 million. The catch is that the borrower has to use $30 million of the loan proceeds (the cash) to buy a particular property (the trash). The property is a soon-to-fail real estate project that the S&L funded with an ADC loan.

In this example, the initial ADC loan was valued on the S&L's books at $25 million. The bank board examiners found that the property is really worth $12 million and ordered the S&L to recognize a $13 million loss, which would cause the S&L to fail its minimum capital requirement. The S&L fights the order and says that the project not only has no loss, but is profitable. By buying the property for $30 million, the new borrower proves there is no loss. The old borrower uses $25 million of the purchase price to repay the S&L in full. Assume that the original ADC loan had a 50 percent equity kicker. The old borrower made a 5 percent profit on the sale of the project ( $30 million minus $25 million). He now pays the S&L its one half interest in his net profits, $2.5 million. The S&L is able to remove the $13 million loss from its books that the Bank Board ordered and to book a $2.5 million gain from the equity kicker. It also books the self-funded points, fees and interest it pays itself from the second ADC loan. The best part is that the second borrower appears fully independent of the S&L. How can the examiners prove it is a scam?

*I'll trade my dead horse for your dead cow* works the same accounting alchemy. Mustang S&L buys a troubled project from one of Longhorn's  S&L's ADC borrowers that is about to default, and Longhorn S&L reciprocates. Both S&Ls pay well above book value, allowing both S&Ls to avoid default and loss recognition while booking a substantial gain.