# IAA, Copart ([[CPRT]]), and Salvage Auctions
by #InPractise 

_Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise._

### I guess a good place to start would be how you got to IAA, what you did when you were there, and why you left?

I worked in automotive remarketing for about 20 years. 17 of those were in an independent auto auction, which was more of a whole car setting. We are in the northeast and we ran about 1,000 cars a week. There were different types of vehicles and a very small percentage of that was salvage or total loss, if you want to call it that. That seemed to be where I did well. When I wanted to move on from the independent world and go into a more global type of business that had more to offer and more upward mobility, I chose IAA. I always heard they were a great company to work for, and they were. They have a global footprint, they're very technology-driven and they've done a good job so far. I worked with them for about two and a half years and when I first started there, they had me in a hybrid role where I worked with insurance companies, with commercial accounts, and with vehicle purchasing companies; all different types of verticals. It was great because I got to wet my toes in several different types of total loss vehicles.

### It might be helpful to give an overview of the business from your perspective. How does it all work, specific to IAA?

I was brought up in the auto auction industry. It's a big industry; the largest players are Manheim and ADESA and it's primarily whole car. It's a whole different animal with IAA and Copart; it's more of a commodity sale. 75% of their sales are total loss, but they are trying to grow the commercial part because they've done the work on the back end. They have a global buyer base, which the other auctions don't have. They never really spent time building a buyer base out of the country, so they have a pretty good advantage, especially now where everything's gone digital and technology-based. They could make some strides into that whole car space now, especially since people have become more comfortable with buying things online. Copart, for instance, has done it for 17 years and made the transition about a year ago to go fully digital. While many people thought that might hurt them, I think it only helped them. It made their global buyer base stronger. As far as them just being only total loss, I think it will grow.

Additionally, the numbers of total loss vehicles continue to rise because as vehicles become more expensive and become computers on wheels, they cost more money to fix, so they become a total loss much quicker. I read a study that showed that from 2014 to 2019, it increased by about an additional 17%. With the world changing right now, the only questions that you have there are, will there be fewer cars and will that create a problem with total loss. Every vehicle that's ever made will become a total loss at some point, so you can almost gauge how many vehicles you're going to have running through your business when there are only two competing companies. Every single car is going to end up there eventually. It's just in a different period of its lifecycle that it might be running through a different type of sale, wholesale or a retail. Eventually, it's going to get to one of these markets. The question is, when will it get there? Over the last decade, the miles went up on vehicles because they were just built better. So they were older vehicles that were then becoming total loss, but still, there were more vehicles being sold. There are all kinds of equations to understand and make sense of it, to know if it will continue to grow or not.

From my perspective, of course, I was more intimately involved in IAA, so I saw what they were doing on the tech side to create enterprise value and, as I said, they were very technically driven. They were good at merchandising the vehicles, which made new revenue streams for them as well. They were looking at other products. IAA total loss sold a software package to insurance companies that enabled the insurance companies to work with the finance companies and have the vehicles paid off and then the title sent. They cut that time down from 30 days to seven days because they had the connectivity. Interestingly, it took that long to get any type of a loan payoff like that. It seems like it would be something that would organically grow out of the business, but it took a long time.

### Could you talk a bit about the whole car side and how it's different from salvage?

That’s more of a dynamic trading ground. You have the franchise dealers, who sell their new cars, but many of them, in the last 15 to 20 years, have recognized a significant revenue of selling used cars. With some of them, that's become more of a revenue heavy business than the new car. Some need to go out and get used cars that they can sell in their market. If you wanted to buy a used Toyota Rav 4, you'd probably go to your Toyota franchise dealer and see if they had a used one. The chances are that the vehicle wasn't traded in at their store; chances are the dealer bought it at an auction, at an ADESA or a Manheim, or one of the 190 independent auto auctions out there. The cars that go to those auctions come from off-lease vehicles, from dealership trade-ins and from fleets; any type of managed fleets.

There's a good mix of vehicles and not only franchise car dealers but also independent car dealers can find their niche. They can find what sells in their market. They can pick and choose because technology has advanced so significantly. A lot of the auctions, where they were siloed into the types of cars they have and the cars you can buy from this location, have changed because they've added on to other platforms. For instance, you may go to an independent auction and buy a car through their lanes but you might also log onto their site and buy a car from several other auctions like OPENLANE, OVE or SmartAuction because they have to offer additional platforms for sale for their commercial accounts.

It's becoming smaller but also more extensive. It's becoming a small world, in that everyone's providing the product on many different platforms, but at the same time, there are all these new technologies and new platforms coming out. I feel a little bad for the used car buyer in this day and age because they have to be all over the place; they have to be everywhere to source the right vehicle. Technology has helped a lot, but it's also created so many more channels and it's not the easiest thing to be an independent car purchaser now.

### And you've seen what's happened in used car prices.

Oh my gosh, they’re insane.

### Do you have a view on that? A lot of it might be temporary because of COVID, but there's also a long-term trend in these prices going up.

A lot of it has to do with COVID. It has to do with the chip shortage. They're not getting any new fleet cars, so nobody's turning in their fleet cars. The prices going up exacerbates the problem even more. Now you have the consumers with vehicles coming off lease who would typically turn in the vehicle and the dealer would have a chance at that vehicle. But the consumer has become smart because the vehicle has actually risen in price. It's become an appreciating asset, which hasn't been the case in a very long time. For instance, I had a vehicle I was going to turn in and I called and said, what's my residual value on this? What's my buyout? They told me, $11,500. I plugged into Carvana or Vroom – you have access to all these tools now – and it popped up as $15,000. I said, I'm going to buy it. Why would I ever turn it back in? I'll just sell it. This is an anomaly that's never happened. Trying to source vehicles has been such a problem for this period now.

With the adoption of more carshare and rideshare, I wonder if that might even out. I think people understand. They have a vehicle, they've been working from home and the vehicle sits in the driveway 95% of the time. If I lived somewhere where it was feasible, would I rent out that vehicle on a new platform like Turo or Getaround or HyreCar or any one of these platforms that are creating a more shared fractional ownership model? That could happen, but what does it mean? Does that mean most cars are going to be total losses sooner? Probably, because you're going to have people driving them that don't care about the vehicle because it doesn't belong to them; it just belongs to the vehicle's shared ecosystem.

I try to have an exact opinion about what's going to happen, but I don't think anyone really can. There are two sides to every story. You have the people that say, well, people aren’t going to give up car ownership because everyone's moving out of the cities and into the suburbs and cars are your freedom; you need to have a car to live that far away. That's a good point. But then all these people are now working from home. I have four sons; back in the day, I had six cars in my driveway when they were all home. Do you need six cars in your driveway when you're all working from home? I don't think so. I think, with the United States specifically, having a car means freedom to many people. It's such an ego purchase or, not even an ego purchase, it makes you feel comfortable, it makes you feel American to have a car. It's going to be harder to give that up for some people, but I believe that with behaviors changing, there will come a point when that seems not only more accessible but more desirable.

Add on top of that the new subscription formats that are coming. I have a vehicle now that fits what I do, for the most part. Maybe I want to have more of a fractional ownership piece where I'm part of a club; maybe it's part of GM, or it's part of Stellantis. I'm able to have a vehicle that's a sports car for three months and then I turn it in and get a truck without having to go through the financing and insurance and all the rigamarole of getting a new car. You can be part of a subscription plan and you can choose cars depending on what membership level you are. I have a gold membership; I get the Mercedes or the GMC Sierra. It's hard to say if there will be more total loss cars and if that will continue to make the IAAs and Coparts grow. There potentially might be fewer cars, but I think they are smart enough that they're doing enough other work in building the technology and creating the market share that they're both going to be good to be invested in from my perspective.

### You mentioned that it was harder for the used car buyers now. I imagine it's incredibly difficult to compete with an IAA or Copart on any of this.

Yes, I think it's incredibly hard. Additionally, you have these companies that are closing the gap between wholesale and retail. These companies are purchasing wholesale and selling directly to retail, without going through a franchise dealership or a dealership that's able to take the asset, intelligently understand what it needs, then add to the vehicle to move it to the condition level it needs to be, to then be sold as a retail car. I think the consumer is smarter. The consumer is going online and checking everything out before they make a purchase. They know what they want.

Selling cars used to be an art, you have someone walk in the door and if you were a good salesman, you'd get them to drive out in the car you needed to sell. But now it's a science. They know what they want when they come in. They know what they want to spend and it's basically like order filling. They have all these buyers trying to source inventory and there are a lot of great tools out there. I can create a wish list and I can say, I want X car with X amount of miles in this color and anytime it comes up anywhere in the country, it will ping me, and I can try to get it, but it's very involved and it's very time-consuming.

I think a lot has changed in that arena. I know many dealers who had to become agile in dealing with technology and maneuver and be adaptable to how things were changing to survive. We see it in all different types of industries. We have to adapt.

### How are the economics different from the whole car and salvage from an IAA perspective?

Of course, the vehicles are much cheaper, but the fees are much higher because there's a lot more to do with the total loss car. You're not going to go pick up 10 of them. You're going to pick up one on a flatbed, which is costly. You get it back to your yard; how are you going to move it? It doesn't start. You're going to pick it up with a forklift. This will be the issue with them moving into whole car, although I believe that going all-digital has made that a little bit better. You go out to whole car companies and say, we'd love to sell your cars at our sales because we have this global buyer base and we think that they're going to do better than you anticipate, but they don't want their car to go up on a forklift because they don't want it to get ruined. I think when IAA and Copart figure out how they can physically manage the asset in a more owner-friendly way, perhaps more consigners will consign their cars there.

### Don’t they do some of that now, where they allow a car to stay on a dealer’s lot and they have photographs?

There's a couple of things they can do. That is one of them; Copart wins in that arena. They have had an app for several years that works well and dealers use it. It's very user-friendly. IAA lagged behind on that. They worked with some other platforms to add their feed; for instance, you might have a platform that will sell cars. A company called Liquid Motors sells cars for OVE and SmartAuction and OPENLANE. They recently partnered with them; I don't know if it's entirely gone through yet. They'll be able to offer cars from other settings using their software, so they kind of jumped over the fact of just having a fully IAA proprietary app. Even though they still have that, I don't think it gets used nearly as much as it needs to make a big enough revenue stream to make a difference, but they looked at a couple of other ways to get vehicles on their platform. They did that with Liquid Motors and they did that with the AIM through their marketplace. They’re smart enough to understand that they have to open their minds to different ways of selling cars.

### You mentioned they’re behind on the app. Are there other differences between the Copart and IAA that are apparent to customers?

Yes; they're pretty similar, but for the most part, Copart likes to own their land. Copart is publicly traded, but it's privately run; the founder is still manning the ship there. So it's a slightly different dynamic within the company. When I used to go out and speak with dealers, they liked the returns they were getting from IAA but enjoyed the service they were getting from Copart. They run neck and neck.

Whenever one has one product, the other tries to get it and it consistently seems to be that way. Copart has a bit of a larger market share at this point, and I think that they're going more quickly out into the global markets. I believe that IAA is trying to do that too. Perhaps they're being more mindful about how they're doing it, so that's why it's going at a slower pace, which would mean that they're solid. I don't know the CEO of Copart, but I know the CEO of IAA, and I like him and think that he's done a great job. He’s forward-thinking, definitely open to broader ideas in how they can create more market share. They have somebody good at the wheel there, which is always great for a company.

The other thing that I try to think about is okay, what about the EVs coming into the country. Who’s going to win that? Who's going to win how to recycle the battery? Do you just recycle the battery and is that something that happens at IAA? Does that get sold for its rare earths or whatever you can break it down to in the global market? I don't know exactly what the regulations around that will be to sell to other countries or if companies are refurbishing these batteries. They're moving downstream to smaller things, forklifts and lawnmowers, etc. They're being broken down and reused, repurposed.

It will be interesting to know what will happen when there are more EVs, and what will be more interesting to me is what will happen when there are AVs. Are AVs going to crash less? Are we going to have less total loss? I think so. Many people are afraid of AVs, but in my personal opinion, I'd rather have a bunch of AVs on the car than half these people that are driving right now, including myself. I'm distracted all the time. I think that it's going to happen, maybe not for 20 years and certainly not in the suburbs or anything, but those AVs are already there, they're already coming and does that create less total loss?

### I wonder what percentage it takes to get there. Let's say there's 10% AVs on the road, that's not going to create much of an impact, but there is some percentage where it will. Is that 30% or 50%?

Right, and that has to have an impact. Will there be less total loss because the AVs are not crashing? But because they can run 24/7 because they don't need a driver, will their end of life come sooner? I don't know.

### They might be easier to total.

Probably easier to total, because they'll be expensive; it's interesting. Just like anything in life, there are two sides to every story. Whatever happens, it's a reaction that we really can't put our finger on. It's a very volatile market.

### Then there are the opportunities overseas which I imagine we’d trail behind and still have opportunities to grow. I don’t know if you have an opinion from your point of view, they’ve expanded in Western Europe and other places around the world. I think the models can work over there.

I think the models can work there. You mean as far as IAA and Copart?

### Yes.

They are moving to have sales there, but their first move into those locations was for buyers, which I think is great. As the cars become more EV and AV, they also become heavier. Is that going to change because now you have to ship these cars in containers that only hold X amount? Will the cost become prohibitive? There are those questions too. But I certainly think that they can emulate what they've done here in other countries. I'm not educated on the insurance differences there, though, so I don't know if there's a percentage difference when the car becomes a total loss or not.

I know that in this country, even if it doesn't become a total loss if it's close, many people don't want the vehicle back because now it has a depreciated value, whether it’s total loss or not. So they find a way to help their customer to get it to me at total loss because they want to maintain the customer as an insurance customer. There are many things that are changing; even the insurance company itself is changing with the new insurance that is pay for how much you drive. All the apps out there are changing the way insurance companies even insure cars at all.

### I want to get back to something you mentioned where Copart owns the land and IAA had decided to lease it, way back when. Does that matter to the customers? When you're talking to dealers, do they care? Does that ever come into play?

I don’t think the dealers care. I think the investors care but, once again, there are a couple of ways you can look at that. It's great to own the land because you're building enterprise value in the business itself. But from IAA's perspective, by not owning the land and having the flexibility, they have all these lease options everywhere and one of them is with the raceways. All the raceways that lease cars have an agreement with them that if there's ever a catastrophe in that area, they’re able to get that piece of property for the time that they need. So that's interesting because that gives them some nimbleness, that gives them the flexibility to move around the country and have the money available to have the space available wherever the catastrophe might hit. You know, catastrophe is a pretty significant part of the business for both of them. So it depends, do you want to invest in the company or do you want to use the company to sell your asset. If you’re using it to sell your asset, it probably doesn’t matter. You just want to know who’s going to pick up your car the fastest, who’s going to get the title for it so you can sell it, who's going to sell it the fastest, and for the most money. That's it. It's all you want to know. Nothing else matters.

### When you competed with Copart, I guess that was your main competition at IAA. Did the competition break down in any interesting ways? Did you find Copart was stronger in certain geographies or some other ways?

Yes, I didn’t deal with the larger insurance companies and I think that's a whole different discussion because they have such a volume presence that they can make whatever demand they need to make, to whatever company. At that point, it becomes who gives the better service. All things being equal, the pricing is probably the same.

I did deal with some of the level two and three insurance companies and then it was more service-oriented. When I was competing with anyone, such as Copart, I took that on myself, as a personal service, providing difference. I gave them great service, and they would give me the cars because it was pretty similar. So I didn't see too much disparity.

### Is it common to use both at the same time?

Almost every company uses both. Even though I worked for IAA, and of course, I would want every company to use us, primarily, if I owned a company, I would use both. Not only does it keep both companies honest, but it keeps both companies competitive, and isn't that what you want? You want to be open-minded and competitive, so almost every company used both, for sure. And if that was the case, with a lot of fleet management companies, then it was just 100% geography. They would use their software package and the software package would have all of the locations loaded for IAA or Copart and then it would be virtually a geography question. This car is a total loss at this location. It's going to go here because it's close, transportation would be cheap and all things were equal after that.

### How much of this was relationship-driven? Let say you worked at IAA. What if you moved over to Copart? Would customers follow you over there, or was that not how it worked?

I think you could get some customers to move. Maybe the second and third-tier customer; I don't know if you could get a GEICO to go with you if you went to Copart but you never know. It's all about the relationship and all about whom you're talking to, and at the end of the day, doesn't everybody just want to do business with people that they like? That's what they want to do. Sure, you’ve got to make money and are in this to do business, but you want to work with people you like. That's the way I feel about it.

### So on whole car versus salvage, where do you think the more significant opportunity is in the future?

I think it's going to be separate, but from my perspective, I think it will be more of a life cycle situation with the vehicle. What I think is going to happen, is that vehicles are going to be brought to the location that's the most geographically convenient. The vehicle will be assessed at that location and evaluated, depending on what the need is for the vehicle. For instance, a three-year-old fleet vehicle will show up at a location. There will be intelligence. The vehicle will go through a series of cameras that take photos of the condition. Then it will populate with intelligence on the vehicle that, for example, it’s in a 3.5 in condition.

At that point, there will be some intelligence around, if we do this to this car, maybe we can get it to a 4.2, or if we don't want to do anything to the car, then it should be wholesale. If it's wholesale, it can go on any of these platforms. If we can get it to a 4.2, we can make it a retailable vehicle, and if we want to make it retailable, we can put it on any of these platforms. Or the third scenario is to take the vehicle on year four. If at year three we take it off its fleet, maybe year four is the perfect time to become part of the carshare rideshare ecosystem. They're using trucks and fleets through a carshare programs now. So in year four, you can rent it out and make X amount on that vehicle.

What we're seeing is they're analyzing that residual price at third year and fourth year, and there's not as much difference there as they could make if they took it for one year, put it on a platform to rent it and then sold it on the fourth year. So now that comes back in the fourth year, and you make the decision, is it wholesale, is it a total loss? Based on the intelligence and the marketplace, having an understanding of all of these numbers and values, we see a lot more collaborative effort out there. We see so many companies working together to make a full suite of services and make a complete lifecycle process for the vehicle; they kind of see the vehicle from birth to death. Personally, that’s what I think is going to happen. I see Cox is working on something to that end. Other companies are working on that type of project. I'm personally working on a project like that, so that's why I think it's the way it will go.

I think it will be less siloed into, this is a wholesale whole car, this is a wholesale total loss car, this is a retail car; I think there's going to be less silo. I believe every car will go through what we call a mobility hub, where the vehicle gets assessed and there are determinations based on that vehicle and by the owner or, if the owner doesn't want to be involved, by a pre-entered SLA. If this vehicle has this many miles and has this much bad condition, we want it to be sold wholesale. If this vehicle is this condition rating and has only this many miles, we want it to go on a share program. We can preload all of that information in, dependent on the owner of the fleets.

I think it will be an exciting next five years. A lot is changing. The physical auctions that will survive are the ones that have bought into the fact that it will change. They need to offer vehicles that are in their location and they need to help process vehicles so they can become part of the life cycle, so it’s their natural choice to remarket the car at the end of its life.

### I wonder how much of this can be human judgment versus how much is data science and crunching with some algorithm and these variables.

Well, that right there is the gold. We have to get the people that, right now, are the professionals and understand how to take that car from a certain condition and what to do to get it to the next level. Those people are gold right now. Can we teach machines to do that? I don't know; maybe not as artfully as people do it, but scientifically I think we can. While that's all happening, is people's perspective of car ownership changing? Is it just a vehicle to get you from where you need to go?

The other part of what I think about all the time is, even if there are fewer vehicles that people drive, there are way more trucks and delivery vans out there because everything’s getting delivered to your house. Everything. Everyone’s behavior has changed now. COVID was long enough. I never used GrubHub, but I used it while I was in COVID, and now I have it on my phone. Now it's there. So will I use it again? Probably more easily than I would have before COVID. I think that period of 18 months changed a lot of people's behaviors. It made people more comfortable with getting products delivered to their house, such as groceries and their car. I think there will be a lot of change.

Trucking is so interesting as well because they just can't get enough truck drivers, and you have the legacy trucking companies with the legacy truck drivers that think everyone's trying to take their jobs away with the autonomous vehicle movement. Still, no one's trying to take their jobs. There’s just not enough of you, and there are all these products trying to move.

### I’m interested in what you’re talking about, the life cycle and how things will change. Do you think IAA and Copart could be companies that are well suited to go in that direction?

There's always going to be an end of life, so they will always be a part of it. They're trying to move a little bit further upstream. It will depend on their plans to be innovative in that space as far as their buyer base. There are a couple of ways that I think about it. They have an amazing global buyer base, but their global buyer base is based on the vehicle being more of a commodity than a car. Can they grow that buyer base? Can they increase the whole car buyers on there? It's hard because those whole car buyers aren't used to paying the fees. The fees are much higher at IAA and Copart than at the whole car auctions, which is interesting. They have to try to convert those buyers over to make themselves more part of that ecosystem. I think they might have as good a chance as anyone to get in on that full life cycle piece because they already have the end, and the ends might be the most important part.

### Are there any other interesting ways you see these businesses changing over the next five years that we haven’t talked about yet? Any new verticals to get into or anything they talked about that’s kind of out there?

I know they're growing as far as the products that they're selling. They're getting into heavy machinery, airplanes, remarketing of any type of vehicle or unit, so they're growing there. I know that, initially, they start with the total loss of those verticals, but that's kind of a unique buyer base, so I think they would be more successful in selling those units upstream than, say, a car. I think that could be a pretty good indicator of them gaining some market share in a segment they're not currently in. They both have recreational vehicle types of sales – they are moving there – and they both have specialty sales. I know they're moving into plans and things like that, too. It's pretty interesting.

### Of course, they've done other innovative things like turning around the title very quickly.

Right, and getting a loan paid off very quickly. I don't know if this pertains to IAA or Copart, but I see that vehicle valuation is becoming consumer-facing. I don't know if it's entirely out there yet, but I see a time when my car has a sticker on it that tells me, at any day or time, what my vehicle is worth as a wholesale vehicle or as a retail vehicle. So I can make decisions at any time. I could be driving or at a stop sign; oh, my car is worth X amount. I'm going to dump my car today because it's worth this much. I think that's something that's going to happen. It’s a different transaction from a stock because you have to register your car and things like that, but there are fees with stock, so there could be some similarities. But I imagine there will be so much information provided that the consumer can almost treat their vehicle like a liquid asset.

### What about constraints or risks? One of the things that comes up is environmental, having all these cars sitting around in big lots.

Yes, and I know that IAA and Copart, when they open a new location, have to go through all kinds of environmentals because they're going to have cars spilling all sorts of biohazards. I haven't studied enough about EV cars to see how they decompose differently than ICE vehicles. I would have to imagine that it's less dangerous to the environment, but I'm not 100% sure about that. Have you heard anything about that?

### No, not really. I guess that's something that will come up as they handle more volume that way.

Right. They're heavier, so there is talk about infrastructure and bridges and how that will handle having a bunch of EVs. EV semis are going to be much heavier than the semis we have now. How are our roads and bridges going to handle that?

### What about constrained land? From your experience, is acquiring new locations difficult? Are they able to find land? It's just a matter of whether they'll pay the price or not?

There are a couple of ways to look at that, too. They have properties right now; they could do one of two things. They could continue to go out and buy properties, or they could find ways to move the vehicles within their current properties more quickly in and out. That was one of the basis points in having loan payoff, so they could take a vehicle that would sit on their lot for above 30 days and move it to seven, based on the fact that the paperwork would be ready for it to sell and then they could move it off. So now the math has all changed. You have all these locations with X amount of cars that were sitting for 30 days and now only have to sit for seven or 10. You just tripled your potential land.

That product means so much more than just what they're getting in the purchase of the product. It means the movement of the cars through their lots, which is pretty interesting.

### Yes, and they get better at handling the cars in place or off their property. That's another way to increase their capacity effectively.

Think about that. That's a third of the time or less; they could potentially increase their land usage three times over. If the vehicles move even conservatively, say twice, they could fill it up twice in the time that previously they were only able to move those cars once.

### What incentives did you have when you were there? What were the KPIs they would focus on? It comes to mind because you mentioned reducing the number of days a car sits on a lot. I'm wondering what other variables they harp on, if any.

It was the volume and consistency of vehicles coming in and being sold and how quickly we sold them. With any auction, it's always a pendulum. You're always trying to get all the right inventory, so you have all the buyers online buying, and you're always trying to get enough buyers, so your inventory sells at a high enough price. It's a pendulum that just swings back and forth. You're always looking for buyers, and you're always looking for cars. That's part of the equation. If we attracted a new account and they were going to send their cars, you’d better make sure there are buyers for that new account because you have X amount of time to strike while the iron's hot. You have just enough time to pitch your company and make sure that it sheds a nice light on that vehicle being sold there.

So you get the account, the cars are coming in, and then you get busy making sure that the cars sell the first sale, for the highest price, and if they weren't, then there are a couple of things you could do. Were the pictures good enough? Was the condition report that they did inclusive enough? Did it give enough information? Could you have added anything to that car to make it more appealing to a more extensive buyer base? Could it be sold at a different time of the day or from a different location? There are many different variables that you could manipulate to be sure that you are providing the best service for the seller, which is essentially what you’re trying to do so that they’ll send more cars.

### When someone opened up a new account like that, did it take you a long time to get the account over, or was it a quick set up once they decided to come?

It's a bit timely because of the way they’re set up. Everything is based on a customizable SLA. Many fleets sell cars, so a vehicle might come in with some information on it; does it need to be de-identified? Does it need to have an inspection? Do we need to appraise the vehicle? There are many different things that we would go through with the consigner, step by step, line by line. We’d build the SLA and then we'd import that into our system, and then we'd have to communicate that to all the branches. That was a hard thing to do. You know exactly what the customer wants because they told you and you've got it down on paper, but now you have 190 branches. You need to let them all know that, hey, when X, Y, Z's car comes in, make sure you look at this SLA because they need de-identification within three days. If they want keys made, you can spend up to this amount of money without getting approval. There are all kinds of work flow process to get the vehicle repaired and cleared for sale.

### I imagine the customer is kind of brand new, and you have to educate them to the process, or are they bouncing back and forth between IAA and Copart?

Usually, they do both, and they both run pretty similarly, but you do have to train them in how we do it. And you do get a lot of, well, Copart doesn’t do it that way. I don’t have to do that at Copart. And sometimes they play you back and forth; well, this is what I have to pay at Copart. You have to try to negotiate with them to make them happy where they are. There's always that in any type of sales, no matter what they sell. You have to figure out how to appease the client and make them come back to you.

### It sounds like it's not a cookie-cutter solution.

No.

### And you were free to move around variables that you need to make it work?

Yes. It's pretty involved. It's not just that the wrecked car shows up, we sell it and it's gone. There's a lot more involved in exactly what happens to the vehicle when it arrives, how it's put onto the platform, what kind of technology we use. Where will it be broadcast, what types of sale is it in, who will see it? There's a lot of information. They've both done a good job of creating a case for the market share they have, but they’re constantly going back and forth. Last I heard – I don't know if this is true – IAA lost some of their GEICO business in some of their locations. I don't know why that happened; maybe they weren't getting the same returns?

### I heard it was mostly because something slipped during Harvey, and Copart excelled, and IAA slipped a little in that area. I don't know if that's true.

I guess anyone could come up with a narrative. For all we know, the big guy at GEICO liked so and so at Copart. You just don’t know.

### I have also heard that Copart is better for the large volume, but I don't know if that's true.

I don't know either. I do know that IAA just patented a new app for their tower community which was pretty interesting. They made an Uber-type app for towers, so any of the towers could go on it and submit their information, get vetted, then be part of the IAA ecosystem. I believe that they're not just using it as a proprietary product, but they're letting it go out on the market as a revenue stream, which I think is smart. It's smart because not only are they going to build a revenue stream that's not reliant on the physical business at their locations, but it also gets their name in front of anybody who's going somewhere else. If you have to click on the IAA tower app to get a vehicle to Copart, you're still subconsciously looking at IAA. So I think it's brilliant that they did that and were smart enough to let the masses use it.

### What do you think about, in general, the culture at IAA? You mentioned that they’re technically savvy. Do you have anything to add about the [[corporate culture]], if it was different at all from Copart?

From what I hear from Copart, it’s a little scrappier there. There's a little less process as far as working there and getting things done. It's just scrappier. From my perspective, IAA was pretty professional, and it did things well and clean, maybe were sometimes a little slower to the dance but still definitely made an impact. Can you hold on one second?

### I think we've gotten to all of my questions. Is there anything else I should know that we didn’t cover?

I know that IAA is out buying some other companies doing transactions for salvage. They just purchased a company in New Jersey that had a pretty long life of transacting salvage vehicles. So they're out there trying to acquire. They've grown their enterprise value quite a bit in the last couple of years since they spun off from KAR. I think that was a great move. Spinning off from KAR was probably the best thing they could have done.

### Why do you say that?

They were kind of like the red-headed stepchild. Everything that they wanted when they were under that umbrella came last. From my perspective, KAR wasn't interested in helping them innovate to grow their business because it was more about the whole car piece and growing KAR global. So when they spun off, it created their entity to make decisions more quickly and react to the markets. I think it was a great thing for them to do. I'm invested in them both.

### It's a great industry.

I think they’re both going to do well, and I like to see how they play off of each other. I think it's good for everybody. They're going to move quickly into the innovation space, and they're going to understand how to sell the cars as they evolve and become more EV and AV; credit to them for getting ahead of it.

### It will be fascinating to follow the industry and see what happens.

