The implication of [[ADC loan frauds]] are not obvious. One has to understand the fraud mechanism, Bank Board regulation, and a bit about accounting to understand how elegant a Ponzi the control frauds created.

The first implication is that one can see why the S&Ls were taking an equity risk, not making a loan. The real estate developers were not personally liable to repay the loan. Their companies were not really on the hook either: they used shell companies with no assets to sign the note.

The developer would not repay the S&L unless the real estate project succeeded. Indeed, it had to succeed fully because the loan was 100% of the projected value; the S&L would lose money if the appraiser inflated this value even slightly. These were not close call: the typical ADC ponzi loan was clearly an equity investment. This makes their audit partners'consistent treatment of them as true loans all the more disturbing.

Cash moved in one direction in an ADC Ponzi scheme: out of the S&L to the developer. The developer typically did not provide an S&L control fraud with any cash - no downpayment, no fees or points, and no interest payment. The devloper was only required to pay cash when the loan matured, and as I'll explain, they rarely paid cash even then.

This may seem to be a foolish way to run a fraud, but it is actually clever. The first advantage is that the ADC loan can never default before maturity.  Supervisors considered S&Ls with low delinquency rates to be safe and sound. ADC lending looked safe and highly profitable.  That was, of course, too good to be true,  but few supervisors thought like white-collar criminologists in the early years. The administration praised the new entrepreneurs' managerial skills. Managerial expertise brings profits. A big 8 audit firm blessed it. It must be true.

The second implication is that an S&L running an ADC ponzi was certain to report extraordinarily high "income" as long as the auditor allowed it to classify the deals as loans instead of investments.  Every control fraud was able to get its auditors to misclassify its ADC deals as loans. ADC Ponzi booked most of the points and fees they self-funded, i.e paid themselves as immediate income. Roughly 3 percent of the total loan amount instantly became income. Because of the high fees and interest rates, all of it self-funded, a control fraud was certain to report high profits. The extremely rapid growth rate of the ADC Ponzis guaranteed that these profits would be extraordinary.