# Inditex

See [[Global Capabilities and Leadership]]

Amancio Ortega Gaona opened the first Zara store in A Coruna, Spain in 1975, purveying the latest fashions at affordable prices. The strategy remains unchanged to this day. The difference now is that the parent company, Inditex, is one of a handful of truly global fashion retailers. The company's sheer scale is enviable: in 2014, it generated $20 billion of sales from 6'683 stores across the world, distributing more than one billion garments. The founder still owns nearly 60% of the company and is, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires list, the second richest man in the world. 

The company's first store outside Spain opened in Portugal in 1988, heralding a sustained global push. Zara, generating two thirds of group sales, has been the heart of expansion, but Inditex has also successfully launched seven other concepts, including the more upmarket Massimo Dutti ans the edgier youth brand Bershka. Today, the company operates in 88 countries and generates 81% of sales outside Spain. As a touchstone, H&M and Gap operate from approximately half the number of stores in about 55 countries.

Inditex is a beneficiary of the globalization of fashion. However, its explosive international expansion and consistent outperformance of its peers reflects a unique 'demand pull' model and the tight control of all stages of the fashion value chain from design through sales. Most of its retail peers take fashion risks by ordering collections as much as one year in advance. Inditex, in contrast, orders less than half its garments ahead of season, affording more management flexibility to top up offerings continuously as demand indicates. Store sales are analyzed daily using advanced algorithms to suggest optimal inventory composition for each store. 

Deliveries are received bi-weekly in small batches, ensuring that only the best-selling items are displayed in store. This system allows Inditex to avoid major fashion misses and to adjust quickly to local vagaries in weather. Collections share characteristics across borders, with few minor adjustments (such as slightly smaller tailored suits for men in the Far East).  Critical to its global success, the demand pull model allows the company to quickly adapt its offering to reflect local preferences across its international markets.
Whereas many peers still source predominantly from the Far East, Inditex sources nearly two thirds of stock from regions close to its main distribution centers in Spain (such as Morocco), contributing to its market-leading average four-week lead times from design to store. In-house design teams continuously fine-tune top sellers and create new garments, more than 80% produced in response to data collected from the stores. The company's full price sales rate exceeds 80%, well above the industry average of around 65%.
Distribution is also rapid. Most items are delivered straight to stores from the main distribution center in Spain. Outside Europe, this is mainly achieved by air to maximize speed. Underpinning this is a continual investment in technology, epitomized by automated distribution centers and globally standardized information technology. Additionally, store managers, whose bonus compensation exceeds market rates, have deep knowledge of local markets, driving high sales densities.

The premium store locations, with constantly changing displays, are the company's main form of advertising. The combination of high gross profits per store, negligible requirement to reinvest in hefty local infrastructures and a business model that does not rely on advertising makes it easier for Inditex to enter new markets.  All stores are expected to be profitable on a stand-alone basis, from the sole Pull and Bear store in Panama to the flagship Zara store in New York.

Inditex's unique fast fashion operating model produces high gross margins. Since 2000,  the company has generated compounded annual growth in sales of 15% and pre-tax income of 17%, with same store sales growth  averaging 5% annually and positive in all these years. Despite its vast scale, the highly fragmented nature of the apparel industry means that the company's market share is still less than 1% in most countries. The runway for further expansion remains considerable.

