# Innovative Thinking

John H. Holland, a professor in two fields at the University of Michigan - psychology, and engineering and computer science - is a frequent visitor to the Santa Fe Institute, where he has lectured extensively on innovative thinking. According to Holland, innovative thinking requires us to master two important steps. **First, we must understand the basic disciplines from which we are going to draw knowledge; second, we need to be aware of the use and benefit of metaphors.**

You will recognize the first step as being exactly the same as the first part of [[Charlie Munger]]'s process for acquiring [[A Lesson on Elementary Worldly Wisdom| worldly wisdom]]. The ability to link mental models together and then benefit from the connections assumes that you have a basic understanding of each model in the latticework. There is no benefit to stringing mental models together if you have no idea how each model works and what phenomena it describes. Remember, though, it is not necessary to become an expert in each model but merely to understand the fundamentals.

The second step - finding metaphors - may at first seem surprising, especially if it makes you think of your ninth grade English class. At the simplest level, a metaphor is a way to convey meaning using out-of-ordinary, non-literal language. When we say that "work was a living hell," we don't really mean to say that we spent the day beating back fire and shoveling ashes, but rather we want to communicate, in no uncertain terms, that it was a hard day at the office. Used this way, a metaphor is a concise, memorable, and often colorful way to express emotions. In a deeper sense, metaphors represent not only language but also thought and action. Writing in *Metaphors we live by*, the linguists George Lakoff and Mark Johnson suggest that "our ordinary conceptual system, in terms of which we can think and act, is fundamentally metaphorical in nature."

But, Holland argues, metaphors are much more than merely a colorful form of speech, even more than representations of thoughts. They can also help us translate ideas into models. And that, he says, represents the basis of innovative thinking. In the same way a metaphor helps communicate one concept by comparing it to another concept that is widely understood, using a simple model to describe one idea can help us grasp the complexities of a similar idea. In both cases we are using one concept (the source) to better understand another (the target). Used this way, metaphors not only express existing ideas, they stimulate new ones.



See also [[Mental Models]]
