Buffett defined owner earnings in his 1986 letter as "(a) reported earnings plus (b) depreciation, depletion, amortization, and certain other non-cash charges ... less (c) the average annual amount of capitalized expenditures for plant and equipment, etc. that the business requires to fully maintain its long-term competitive position and its unit volume. If the business requires additional working capital to maintain its competitive position and unit volume, the increment also should be included in (c)".

On Wall Street, the term "Earnings" refers to net income or EPS from the income statement. This is what most analysts latch onto and they succumb to availability bias. (They fail to heed Munger's warning: There is nothing more dangerous than an idea if it is the only one you have.) Another widely used metric is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), which. although a ubiquitous term on Wall Street, is a relatively new financial concept. It was not until the leveraged buyout boom in the 1980s the EBITDA was widely adopted as a financial measure. However, EBITDA does not take into account real cash expenses like capex, interest and taxes.

**For value investors, the earnings used for valuation purposes are the owner earnings.** Net Income and EPS are *reported* figures under accounting principles, but the actual cash that the business owner is able to finally take out is very different. Owner earnings tell us how much cash comes into the business owner's pockets. Actual, spendable cash, not inventory and receivables. This is why Buffett calls it owner earnings. Remember, buying a stock is buying a part ownership of a business.

However, there is a subtle omission in Buffett's definition.

Buffett started from reported earnings and then made some adjustments to arrive at owner earnings. But he did not adjust for outlays having a quasi-capex nature, such as advertising or research and development, which are generally treated as an expense in the profit and losses statement before reported earnings are arrived at. So the first variable (reported earnings) in Buffett's equation is likely to be depressed in cases of businesses with emerging moats, that is, businesses that are investing in long-term value-creating initiatives which are being currently expensed in the income statement.

We should capitalize these types of expenditures and amortize them over a conservatively assumed economic life. There are two conditions that must be satisfied to warrant such an adjustment: volume growth and market share gains. Any money spent that expands the size of the moat should be treated by business analysts as an expenditure that delivers an enduring advantage - just like capex. However, businesses that follow conservative accounting treat all this money spent as an expense in the income statement. Such an adjustment, if made, will, in growing businesses where such expenditures are also growing, result in owner earnings exceeding reported earnings.*This is why accounting numbers should always be used only as a basic starting point for investment analysis.*

In moated businesses where money is being spent on expanding the moat and where the above adjustment is made, the correct number to use for determining intrinsic value is the owner earnings/economic earnings number. That is the number one should discount back from the future to arrive at fair value.

Many times, conventional valuation measures based on reported earnings or accounting book values result in an optically high price-to-earnings or price-to-book  ratio for a moated business and investors end up making costly mistakes of omission because they find these businesses to be overvalued. But, as Buffett has said:

> Whether appropriate or not, the term "value investing" is widely used. Typically, it connotes the purchase of stocks having attributes such as low ratio of price to book value, a low price-earnings ratio, or a high dividend yield. Unfortunately, such characteristics, even if they appear in combination, are far from determinative as to whether an investor is indeed buying something for what it is worth and is therefore truly operating on the principle of obtaining value in his investments. *A high ratio of price to book value, a high price-earnings ratio, and a low dividend yield - are in no way inconsistent with a "value" purchase.*


The key point to remember here is that, for businesses that will grow their earnings even at a moderate pace, but for a very long time, the optically high P/E multiples that deter many value investors are in reality pretty low. This means that if you buy a strong moated business at what appears to be a "full price based on current years earnings", you will still end up compounding your money at a higher rate than the discount rate you use to arrive at that "fair price". The longer the competitive advantage period (CAP), the more likely a business is worth a lot more than what the market thinks. "Durability of the moat" is the key factor. The market tends to under-appreciate companies that have really strong moats because the durability often allows for the company's runway to last longer than many expect. **For long-term investing, the focus should be shifted from entry P/E to duration of the CAP**. And P/E multiples should be the result of the valuation exercise and not the cause of it. Evaluating accounting numbers from the right perspective is vital to succeeding as an investor.

> Clearly "accounting"earnings can seriously misrepresent economic reality. We prefer a concept of "economic" earnings... In our view, the value to all owners of the retained earnings of a business enterprise is determined by the effectiveness with which these earnings are used... *Managers and investors alike must understand that accounting numbers are the beginning, not the end, of business evaluation.* - Warren Buffett, Berkshire Hathaway 1982 annual letter.

For example, goodwill can reflect either having paid too much for an acquisition or enduring long-term intangibles whose value *increase* over time. Investors will have to figure out, because the accountants won't. With that in mind, let us evaluate some of the important components of economic earnings, namely maintenance capex and working capital.

My observation over the years is that the market always displays its wisdom and accords a lower valuation to companies with higher maintenance capex (and which thus optically appear to be cheaper than its peers). One needs to derive the maintenance capex figure from the annual report, or get it from management during the conference calls or annual general meeting. Always cross-check what the management is stating versus what they are actually reporting in the annual reports. Total capex is given in the investing section of the cash flow statement. All capex which is not growth capex must necessarily be maintenance capex. So if we can estimate growth capex, we can estimate maintenance capex. Sometimes it is obvious that almost all of the capex is maintenance capex due to competitive pressures. For example, the functional equivalent of Buffett's shutdown of his textile mills are very common in the business world, so one must not take the accountant's definition of capex at face value. Accountants don't evaluate. They *record* transactions. They would rather show something as precise even if it is wrong. How a transaction is recorded does not alter the event or its impact on value. Avoid availability bias. Simply ask: **"Is this expenditure likely to result in a sustainable rise in economic earnings in the future?"**

This will *not* be the case if the margin and/or the productivity gains have to be fully passed on to the end customer; if capex is incurred to replace defunct/old machinery that will only help the company maintain its current earning power; if the industry is characterized by cutthroat competition and-or high rates of technological change/obsolescence that requires *constant capex for protective reasons and/or just to keep up with the competition* which keeps inventing new technology applications, making old technology obsolete; or if historical cost accounting during highly inflationary periods results in under-provision of depreciation in the books. In all these cases, the company in question makes no real profits, because when we correctly treat the money spent on such frequent capex programs not as capex but as maintenance capex, we will figure out that, essentially, there are no owner earnings. **And when there are no owner earnings there is no value.**

This will always hold true, even if the stock market value of such a business in the interim period touches billions of dollars. During such periods, the "Keynesian Beauty Contest"phenomenon is in force, with the investing public "pricing"shares based not on what they think their fundamental value is, but rather on what they think everyone else thinks their value is, or what everybody else would predict the average assessment of value to be. This is a common phenomenon during sector- or asset-class-specific bubbles, or what James Montier calls "greater fool markets":

> They [greater fool markets] are cynical bubbles in that those buying the asset in question don't really believe they are buying at fair price (or intrinsic value) but rather are buying because they want to sell to someone else at an even higher price before the bubble bursts. Chuck Prince, the former CEO of Citibank, aptly demonstrated the typical cynical bubble mentality when in July of 2007 he uttered those fateful words, "As long as the music is playing, you've got to get up and dance. We are still dancing."

Bubbles are more of a social phenomenon than an economic or financial one. People crave the shared experience of being part of something exciting and new. The origin of these bubbles is usually grounded in a sound premise that eventually gets overextended and taken too far. In other words, the essence of every bubble is strong fundamentals, euphorically extrapolated. Graham used to talk about how ideas that were initially sound were eventually carried too far on Wall Street. "You can get in way more trouble with a good idea than with a bad idea, because you forget that the good idea has limits."

Buffett explains how certain asset-heavy businesses with no owner earnings get into troubles when they begin to distribute out of restricted earnings:

> All earnings are not created equal. In many businesses - particularly those that have high asset/profits ratios - inflation causes some or all of the reported earnings to become ersatz. The ersatz portion - let's call these earnings "restricted" - cannot, if the business is to retain its economic position, be distributed as dividends. Were these earnings to be paid out, the business would lose ground in one or more of the following areas: its ability to maintain its unit volume of sales, its long-term competitive position, its financial strength. No matter how conservative its payout ratio, a company that consistently distributes restricted earnings is destined for oblivion unless equity capital is otherwise infused.
Restricted earnings are seldom valueless to owners, but they often must be discounted heavily. 


In this kind of companies, debt issuance and equity dilution occur frequently, and new investors keep pouring money into the firm and are never able to take anything out. And if any dividends are paid, they come not from operating cash flow but out of the fresh infusion of funds by debt and equity investors. It is just recycling cash from new investors to old investors, which is the functional equivalent of a Ponzi scheme. In Berkshire's fiftieth annual letter, Buffett described these kind of companies: 

> Business models based on the serial issuance of overpriced shares - just like chain-letter models - most assuredly redistribute wealth, but in no way create it. Both phenomena, nevertheless, periodically blossom in our country - they are every promoter's dream - though often they appear in a carefully crafted disguise. The ending is always the same: Money flows from the gullible to the fraudster. And with stocks, unlike chain letters, the sums hijacked can be staggering. 
At both BPL and Berkshire, we have never invested in companies that are hell-bent on issuing shares. That behavior is one of the surest indicators of a promotion-minded management, weak accounting, a stock that is overpriced and - all too often - outright dishonesty.

Munger has also voiced his thoughts about such businesses:

> Benjamin Graham used to talk about a *frozen corporation* - a company whose charter prohibited it from ever payout out anything to its owners or ever being liquidated or sold. And Graham's question was: "What is such an enterprise worth?""
I do think that it's an interesting case because I think there is a class of business where the eventual "cash back" part of the equation tends to be an illusion. There are businesses like that - where you just constantly keep pouring it in and pouring it in, but where no cash ever comes back.
For years, I was a director of an International Harvester dealership on the Central Valley. That is a really though business. And there's never any cash. As the saying goes, at the end of the year, your profit is sitting out in the yard - in the form of your used equipment. And struggling with a business that never produces any cash - whether it's winning or losing as a matter of accounting - is no fun. And I watched that being done for many years. Then I was in an electronic business where we had what I would call style changes. However, they were really technological changes. Our main product was obsolete by magnetic tape. And nobody told me that magnetic tape was going to be invented and that it was going to obsolete my main product. And I found it's a very unpleasant experience.

The working capital component in the owner earnings definition is an important input in the valuation exercise. Anytime a business requires additional capital (fixed or working) that will do nothing for rise in unit volume or market share, the money spent should be treated as an expense. When competitive conditions deteriorate, such "required" expenditures always go up. **It is usually a warning of things to come.** If bargaining power is permanently shifting from a business to its customers and/or suppliers, then the amount of working capital needed by the business just to stand its ground in terms of unit volume and competitive position will increase. That increase is (c) in Buffett's equation and should be treated as a charge against earnings.

Of course, when we do that in practice, then, in many cases, we will found that (c) exceeds (a)+(b), which means that there are no real earnings to speak of. And if there are no real earnings, then there is no real value, although the asset in question may enjoy fabulous market value for a while. As Buffett has said "Value is destroyed, not created, by any business that loses money over its lifetime, no matter how high its interim valuation may get." He closed his textile operations when he figured out that there were no owner earnings; he refused to throw good money after bad.





See [[Owner Earnings vs Reported Earnings]]