# L'Oreal

Vanity is venerable: ancient civilizations as diverse as the Egyptians, Chinese, Indians, Japanese, Greeks and Romans used scented oils, mineral pastes, and natural dyes to mask body odor, paint skin, and dye hair.  Catering to these deep-seated impulses, today's cosmetics industry generates yearly revenues of around $250 billion. Purveyors sell "hope in a jar", as Revlon founder Charles Revson once put it, including some pricey products, such as the $2'000 price tag for Estée Lauder's Crème de la Mer moisturizer. 

The market leader is L'Oréal, founded in Paris in 1909 by a young chemist named Eugène Schueller, whose strong [[brands]] translate consumer appetite for beauty into significant [[Pricing Power]]. It is adept at exploiting the lack of a direct link between price and outcome or between price and input cost. A small tube of Lancôme Visionnaire anti-wrinkle face cream, for instance, retails for $90, five times that of mass-market rivals offerings such as Nivea.

Consumers are unlikely ever to test the comparative effects of the two products and no consumer can compare results of using any given product with results of not using it. So relatively small perceived advantages can be hugely valuable. And L'Oréal nurtures customer trust in its brands and an emotional connection with them as intimate products - applied to eyes, lips, and other sensitive areas. Pricing power arises from [[Intangible benefits]] that are often unquantifable, unlike what is necessary to gain pricing power for commercial and industrial products/ 

While consumers of many goods, from automobiles to snacks, can only consume so much, the scope for consumption of cosmetics is almost limitless. A recent study, for instance, showed that the average Korean woman uses 11 beauty products and spends 40 minutes every day on her beauty regime. Few sectors offer such scope to sell more products to existing customers. Many consumer surveys indicate that the beauty regime is among the last to be cut even when times are tight. That is why the cosmetics market has proven to be less discretionary than one might imagine: demand rises during economic expansions and tends to remain steady during contractions. 

L'Oréal attracts customers by offering a wide line of cosmetics products and dominates across channels, price points, categories, countries and brands. It typically gains share in each, demonstrating sustained consumer trust, which is driven by two primary strengths. The first is the scientific basis for its products, achieved thanks to enormous scale and the effectiveness of its R&D branch. L'Oréal has been responsible for introducing a high proportion of new chemicals into the industry, many remaining critical components of its products today. The second is getting the information to consumers: the company is the world's third largest advertiser, notable because the two largest  - Procter & Gamble and Unilever - have more numerous product lines.

L'Oréal's pricing power manifests in its high gross margins, which exceed 70%. Combined with strong cash generation, good returns on capital and a steady top-line growth trajectory, such compelling margins complete a virtuous circle which has enabled the company to sustain its market leadership. Success is longstanding and shared with owners: L'Oréal boasts regular dividend increases stretching back over 50 years - with a 16% compounded annual growth rate over the past 14 years. 