Leadership is one of the most important aspects of a successful business organization. A corporation is composed of people who, whether consciously or unconsciously, are essentially working for primarily selfish reasons. Great leaders can attract, and, most importantly, retain high-quality individuals by convincing them to work hard for the good of the company. Intelligent fanatics create a higher cause that all employees have the chance to become invested in, and they provide an environment in which it is natural for employees to become invested in the company's mission. 

Leadership is "critical to an organization's culture because senior leaders create these systems and cultures, and everyone look to their behavior for guidance about how to behave with regards to ethics". At Southwest, for example, the company created an employee-first and family-like culture where fun, love, humor and creativity were, and continue to be, core values. Herb Kelleher was the perfect role model for those values. He expressed sincere appreciation for employees and remembered their names, and he showed his humor by dressing up for corporate gatherings and even by settling a dispute with another company through an arm-wrestling contest. Colleen Barrett, vice-president of Southwest, said, "Herb is Southwest Airlines. He exemplifies everything the company stands for."

Strong leaders demonstrate a commitment to their values. When great leaders say that their companies have a [[Decentralized Organizations| decentralized]], egalitarian business culture, they mean it. All intelligent fanatic CEOs directly answered questions from any employee, regardless of position. Herb Kelleher had no windows in his office, to prevent employees at Southwest from harboring envy for the boss's office.

Frugality and expense control is one of the few aspects of business where employees and leaders have one hundred percent control. Almost all other operational activities are outside a company's full control, so frugality is a very important value for performance-driven cultures. Intelligent fanatics often demonstrate their values of thrift by setting an example. Even when Sam Walton, founder of Walmart, became the richest man in the world, he still drove an old, beat-up 1979 Ford F-150, and he famously said "What am i supposed to haul my dogs in, a Rolls Royce?" Jeff Bezos was living in a small apartment and driving a Honda when Amazon went public. At the time, his net worth was roughly $500 million. Ken Iverson was proud of the fact that his base salary was the lowest among the Fortune 500 CEOs. 

Offices of intelligent fanatics are rarely fancy, due to their beliefs in conserving money for things that matter. Chester Cadieux had a drab office, and Sol Price had bookcases made out of concrete blocks and boards, set on vinyl floors. Price Club suggested that employees pay five cents for each page of personal copying. At Anheuser-Bush Inbev and other 3G-led companies, there are no offices, just large tables where everyone sits, works, and communicates. Employees at Amazon have "door-desks", just like the one Jeff Bezos built for himself when the company was a start-up. And the Nucor headquarters offices were furnished with orange plastic kitchen chairs. 

SEI investments is a company that has similar egalitarian culture, without offices. Desks are found in large rooms, and as is the case at the 3G partners business, this promotes increased communication among employees and departments. Because the company wants to maintain an entrepreneurial, adaptive environment, the desks are connected to cables in the ceilings, making them easier to move.

Intelligent fanatic CEOs have integrity and always do the right thing, even when it is hard. To them, uncompromising integrity of character is invaluable. Integrity is not something that can be taught, so great companies hire only individuals with high integrity. At QuikTrip employees are told to always ask themselves "What would your mother think about what you did today?" Sol Price often asked his employees to think of themselves as the owner's alter ego, and Bruce Halle at Discount Tire had his employees ask themselves "What would Bruce do?" You can only ask this when you lead by example. Jim Sinegal speaking at Sol Price's memorial service on January 8, 2010, gave a great example of how much integrity Price possessed: 

> One time we were selling ladies' hosiery for $3.99, and Sol got the idea we should sell the package for $2.99, and so he said we would give up fifty cents if the supplier would also give up fifty cents. And so we did. Ira Kaplan who as the buyer at the time, got the supplier to give up fifty cents and we sold them for $2.99. After about six months it had not really moved a needle in selling the hosiery, so Sol asked Ira to go back to the supplier and give them back fifty cents. The factory could not believe that. They had never had anyone buy from them who had that type of integrity in terms of the business - and that was Sol. 

Strong leadership is necessary while building a company from scratch, and it is exponentially more important if an established, mediocre company wants to achieve greatness for employees, customers, and shareholders. Before the 3G partners' involvement, Brahma was described as a mediocre company, happy with the status quo. The company was formal, with numerous management layers - a culture of seniority and mediocrity. Marcel Telles came into the company with a much different style, wearing jeans, sitting on tables, and saying "What is important going forward is results. If you bring results, you will be rewarded. Otherwise, your life in the company will be short." The informality and new incentive structure, along with a purge of poorly performing employees (only necessary during the turnaround phase) led to Brahma's success.

Informality was important at General Electric under Jack Welch. He said, "The story about GE that hasn't been told is the value of an informal place. I think it is a big thought. I don't think people ever figured out that being informal is a big deal." Welch's informality helped GE break the nine layers of bureaucracy that had formed during its growth. This allowed GE to think and act more like an entrepreneurial business than like a large, lumbering corporation.