# Livechat - Competitor Perspective
by #InPractise 

_Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise._

### LiveChat is one of my portfolio holdings. My quest in our discussion today would be from LiveChat's standpoint. I know Intercom is a private company, but I'd like to bring LiveChat into the picture as much as possible. I know there are a couple of other publicly traded companies in the space not quite similar to Intercom or LiveChat, for example, Zendesk or LivePerson. Some beta products are kind of comparable to these two but not quite in the same space, so that's why I'd like to keep it from LiveChat's angle. Before we get started, I would love to know you and your background a little bit.

I'm from New Zealand originally, hence the funny accent, but I've been in the US for the last 10 years. I came up from business school, before that, within financial services, McKinsey, and then a private equity holding company. Since then, I've been in product with some large companies such as Zynga, I had my own startup, and most recently worked for SurveyMonkey, which then became Momentive and is now part of Zendesk. I was then with Intercom for a few years and, currently, the company JumpCloud which is more into IT device management rather than being feedback and supports based.

### You've spent, I believe, at least four years at Intercom?

Yes, almost four years and I was at SurveyMonkey for a couple. Saw a bunch of changes during that time and the evolution of the space in general.

### Maybe that's where we can start, the larger space. As an investor, I'd love to get some quantitative feel for how you've seen the space, but if it's not answerable, I'm absolutely fine. If there's some context, it's always helpful to get numbers. I've seen numbers come out of Zendesk; I think they're the ones that have done a decent job of laying up – from their perspective, of course – the size of the market and how they attack the market. LiveChat is somewhat reluctant. They've come out with numbers that are somehow always below par, from my standpoint, but as somebody from Intercom, how would you think about the size of the market, who the players are, and where do you think it's evolving next?

I think Zendesk has an easier job of this because they have a sector focus. I think LiveChat is a little bit like databases or surveys, where if you asked them how big the survey market is, it depends on what you think is a survey. Most of the money isn't in the survey itself; it's adjacent to the survey. It's sort of the same thing with live chat. If you take Intercom, Intercom is fundamentally a customer support product with marketing automation stuck into it and some sort of knowledge management to help features and a little bit of sales engagement as well. In that sense, it competes with a really wide range of products, in the same way as surveys.

So they might keep competing with Qualtrics and Medallia, very large listed businesses. They're survey-based businesses, but they’re BI tools and that is, actually, where the magic’s made. You’ve got to look at it more as LiveChat as part of the support market more than LiveChat per se. If you look at a lot of the companies that do well, they tend to have a reasonable sector focus. I think LiveChat and LivePerson and some of the very early people in the market have now adapted. The way that Intercom, Zendesk, HubSpot and all the other guys approach it is they were always trying to push away from the idea of live chat and move more to this idea of messaging. If I were to send you a text message or an email, it’s asynchronous. It's not expectational like you're right there, even though sometimes you will be. That's the big fear from the customer standpoint.

I get live chat as a thing for large customer-facing websites where there are teams of people ready to deal with this, and what these other companies have done is they've moved it to this model; it's chat as messaging, which means they're synchronized. They've opened that up a bit, but I think people are still unclear from a main user standpoint. At Intercom, we've spent a lot of time on how to explain to end-users what the difference is here, but we're kind of getting distracted into product stuff.

In terms of the market, I really would think about it as sector by sector. Intercom competes with Zendesk or some portion of Zendesk. I'm not sure that Zendesk would think they necessarily compete with Intercom because they're going after a portion of Zendesk's market. It's even more true now, as Intercom has gotten larger and built more of the features that would make them competitive with a ticketing system like Zendesk. Zendesk does very well with larger ticketing systems that deal with ecommerce. Intercom doesn't deal with phone support and retail distribution or stuff with warehouse products. Intercom is much more focused on SaaS businesses, I think.

If you think of the other big players, it tends to be pretty focused by the channels. With Zendesk, I think of primarily email. They added a chat thing and the phone, but they're very, very focused. I think the product you choose depends on what your primary channel is. Zendesk has phone support, but if you're primarily a phone system, you might go to a Dialpad or a Talkdesk. There's a wide range of companies that focus on that space. It’s the same thing with LiveChat. That was kind of Intercom's differentiation and where LiveChat sits as well where they say, we are primarily chat-based or messaging-based as an iteration of that idea. They all sort of support everything; Zendesk will do chat, Intercom handles email, but there’s a fundamental focus on each of those areas that will make each of those products most successful in that space.

This channels thing continues through; there's a wide range of players. I think it's a pretty fragmented market, and it depends on how you define it. I think at Intercom, definitely the market size we looked at was closer to a trillion than a billion in terms of total market size for CS, and that's very broadly defined. It also depends if you think about agent proactivity. Suppose you look at the prices that a piece of software like Gong is charging for sales enablement. In that case, they’re saying, look, we're charging not as a helpdesk software or a CRM software – for which there is some budget but it's pretty fixed – but actually, they’re replacing agents; they’re replacing people. So as opposed to $10 a user, I can try and say, well, I'm replacing a $100,000 rep. I think that's where some of this ticket deflection or ticket resolution type stuff – answer bot for Zendesk, resolution bot for Intercom, a range of these kinds of AI products – starts to come in and even further expand the size of the addressable market. You're replacing some of the people that would work in the space.

That would be the quick summary. I'm not laying out the landscape necessarily, but it's how I would think about it. In terms of LiveChat players, Olark is a big one; they're like a free tool. LiveChat didn’t come up a whole lot. There’s Intercom, Zendesk, Nice Chat; many people will use HubSpot's chat, especially if it's more on the customer success or sales use cases; they just sold to Vista and they're very strong for that sales use case. There’s Freshchat, a Freshworks product.

### The one from India?

Exactly. Help Scout is in that similar space, and there are a bunch of vertically focused guys. Who are those ecommerce people? It’s a startup, these French dudes; I think they're doing a nice job and they got bought by a private equity. They had a nice product, but it wasn't super well invested in. It began with a K; not Klaviyo but something like that.

### I think I know which company, but the name slips my mind. The entire space also seems to be going through this move to what they call enterprise, meaning a bigger client base for whatever reason. For example, Zendesk is now turning its focus on CRM, which is Salesforce. I don't know if it's truly comparable, but everybody seems to be attacking. These are the bigger clients, but that seems to be the focus. Was that a focus of Intercom when you were there, or is that a focus now?

Yes, absolutely.

### More importantly, is it even a reasonable attempt to do that? To go up against Salesforce?

We’re seeing people bringing in these tools as just a chat layer. What has surprised me is the willingness of people to stack tools together. Certainly, Intercom, on top of Zendesk, was a not uncommon structure. You would think they do the same thing, but basically, customers pick and choose tools for a very specific purpose. They like the UI of Intercom and that interface, but they'll use Zendesk for the ticketing system and Salesforce for the CRM. I'm not intimately familiar with Zendesk's CRM effort; I'm sure it's made some progress. For customers who need a lightweight CRM, maybe you could see that using Salesforce would be stupid, but maybe for very consumer companies or prosumers where you want something that's a bit CRM-like, and most of that information exists in their support tool, you may want to just use a CRM like them. It would be hard to imagine that happening.

To do your job well, it's important to know the information about the customer. Sales need the information about the customer, so there are these replications that happen everywhere. Customer information can essentially be synced and replicated across all these different sources, plus the digital online product. There'll be many things happening in the product that need to be synced between these two sources.

### Switching topics slightly, was Intercom focused on any specific sector or number of sectors?

Yes, Intercom was very much focused on other B2B software tools. If you needed phone support, it wasn't a good fit. Intercom would be the full-stack solution for smaller companies and companies where you're primarily interacting online. Part of the secret sauce was because their chat wasn't just chat. It had a lot of awareness, and you could send contextual messages, which is very useful if you have a digital product. We sold a ton to B2B SaaS. It made a lot of sense there. There was also a surprising number of companies that would buy just a UI. It continues to amaze me how important UI is in this game. They wouldn't use any of the functionality, and it's a very expensive product to buy just for the UI, but some people bought it just purely for chat, and they didn't do any of the clever messaging or retargeting kind of stuff, and they just wanted the chat. That’s where it tended to do better, and less so when you had a large phone support component.

The other piece you see in this business is that I think there is room for similar solutions that target consumer businesses and similar solutions that target B2B companies. The reason there being that you end up charging per conversation. You won’t charge directly per conversation, but you sort of charge per agent. That becomes the same thing; an agent handles a certain number of conversations because the whole market charges on seats or agents. The value of a conversation with B2B is incredibly high. The value of a conversation to a consumer company is incredibly low, so you end up needing to pick one of them. You go broad underpriced for your business customers, and you capture that consumer demand because, again, with it comes a lot of that automated stuff where you could see messages along the journey. There is a lot of interest from gaming companies and extremely low LTV companies like that and large enterprise companies where the LTV is very high.

It's impossible to capture both the extremely high value per message of B2B and the needs of a very low-value product. I think you'll end up seeing a lot of similar products that simply distinguish buyers by go-to-market. So pricing by marketing with Drift and Intercom which are super similar products for the large part of their lives, although they have drifted apart now. Drift has such a good positioning around things such as crushing your sales goals, high five, fist bump, whereas Intercom is much more about nice support, customers, we're old friends, great experiences. That positioning resonates so well for support, but salespeople hate it. But there is, I think, a real go-to-market end goal for all of this when you take two similar products and just market them differently, which you could argue Drift has done and do well at.

### From a pricing standpoint, you said you didn't come across LiveChat as often as you did, even say Zendesk or somebody else.

I could say I almost never came across it, interestingly.

### That’s good. These guys seemed to have focused on primarily definitely less than 100 employees, but most times than not, it would be 10 to 15 employees, so it’s a much, much smaller focus. Be that as it may, I'm assuming the pricing was on a per-agent basis at Intercom?

We had per agent, and this is where it gets messy; this was a constant thorn in my side. I did so much work on our pricing and, having nailed out some pricing with other companies, it was a uniquely hard challenge. We were this hybrid support and marketing automation product; marketing automation products charge by message or by an active user, support charges by agent. We ended up doing a bit of both, so you’ll see on Intercom’s pricing on the website that it's a function of seats and people reached; it's some form of the number of people that you’ve sent messages to.

### These guys have all started moving towards the SaaS market, but as I said, the focus is on much smaller types of plan-based. I don't know if you've had a chance to look at LiveChat’s numbers at all, but the reason why I got excited about this is because of a few different things. I like to look for companies generating a very high return on incremental capital and have the opportunity to reinvest. These guys don’t have as much opportunity as some of my other companies to reinvest, so they return 15% of their earnings as dividend. All this is public; I'm not sharing anything that I shouldn't. More importantly, on the incremental return on capital, these guys are just out of right field. I'm talking about the average return on capital running north of 65% to 70%.

### Obviously, it's capital-light. The big expenditure for them is salaries. I want to come back to the SG&As from Intercom’s standpoint but before that, I don't come across this kind of return metric very often. This is incredibly high. I know it's sort of a difficult question, but I'm still going to pose it to you. Since I don't know about Intercom's numbers, I will ask this from LiveChat's numbers; why is 65%, 70% return on capital sustainable, or is it in this space?

Do you mean return on incremental invested capital?

### Yes.

That’s an annual return, so you give them $100 and they’ll give you back $65.

### That’s what I mean.

These are SaaS businesses. Their gross margins are incredibly high. I'm guessing 90% first margins probably, even less. These guys are smaller ones; it looks like $50 million recurring, and they're not growing that fast. You have 20% which, in this sort of world. Look at Drift and Intercom. Same thing, but they have a differentiated position, and if you're a salesperson, you look at both, and you go, oh wow, that pitch looks like a salesperson; they say ROI, I'm going to buy from them. These people have gone on G2 and the rest of it, and they're kind of organically searching. Just through positioning and marketing and the product features – they have a really good calendar integration – and this kind of stuff, by targeting a group, there is this natural market that you can capture.

Because the buying process is changing, people are usually pretty savvy and these products are bought maybe more than they're sold. If you think of the sales funnel, you used to have someone with a briefcase running around knocking on doors. Now, there is some group of people who are going to search for you on Google. You can add paid marketing, but all these incremental things are, increasingly, like the low ROI. This was true for our business, and we're dealing with this at JumpCloud now. If you want to push it faster, the incremental investment is a low ROI. At some point there are only so many people shopping for live chat software at a given point in time. You can maybe double it with lots of banners and ads and so on, which is what everyone else is doing, by the way, because of the flood of money coming in from SoftBank and Tiger and everyone else.

But I love what they're doing. If you stop and say, no, what we're going to do is take out some of what you might think of as natural market; the people for whom we are such a layup. It's so obvious that our product was built for them and that our positioning is straightforward for them. They'll educate themselves online on our website. They will probably start to try it out themselves. They'll set up a few things. As I said, LiveChat will talk to some of them, or hopefully, they'll talk to only some of them, and a bunch of them can do it by themselves. We've generated revenue from a bunch of blog posts we've put up; we’ve done in-company marketing and we had this website. It was the zero incremental SG&A effort, really, with some fixed cost to make all that stuff happen, and zero product costs. For larger customers, it's a bit of effort, but again, the salesperson could be way down the buying funnel.

So yes, if you're not trying to push it harder and just say, look, we're going to have whatever this is – it looks as if these guys are at $4.4 million monthly recurring – we'll grow at a modest 20% just by behaving in that more incremental and disciplined fashion. Add only those layup product features that it’s so obvious that we need to build, or they’re highly monetizable, and it's super adjacent. You starve the team of capital, and you make them think super hard about only investing in the stuff that's not fun innovation and beat the future, but things that people are screaming at us; take my money if you build this thing. I think you can build a profitable business this way. I think the thing is that’s not always true. It’s not very scalable in the sense of, if you give them a million dollars of capital, they’ll give you 65%. If you give them 100 million, I think it's going to be very different. Basically, it’s about staying right on the bottom level of that late return curve and because no one else or very few other people are doing it.

### To the extent possible, what were the metrics that people at Intercom looked at in evaluating performance?

We were very much about incremental revenue. We also cared about also incremental returning revenue, so MMR and, increasingly, IRR. We cared about net revenue retention. That was a big number, obviously, and capped LTV. As an aside, I always found it funny – and it's true of any large SaaS business – that no one cares about GAAP numbers, and no one even cared about non-GAAP numbers at Intercom. I had no idea what our revenue numbers were.

### That's a great point. I don't care about the GAAP numbers, and this is not even GAAP. This is IFRS; it’s a Polish company. But back to CAC or LTV, was that a specific range Intercom wanted to be within?

A lot of people seemed to settle out on three, and it varied by target and other stuff. We were pretty a standard Silicon Valley company in that sense.

### When I look at all these other publicly traded companies, Zendesk, HubSpot, LivePerson – particularly LivePerson – the SG&A margin – and by that, I mean total SG&A over revenue – is the highest at LivePerson and it's well known for being 15% in the other companies. LiveChat, on the other hand, two and a half years ago, was in the teens. It's gone up a little bit because they've hired a couple of sales guys here in the US and are paying them. Increasing the size of that sales team has resulted in an SG&A margin at a low 20%. It’s still almost less than half of what it costs in these other publicly traded spaces. Intercom, I'm assuming, was closer to the rest of the publicly traded market?

Good question. I bet it would be closer to the publicly traded. Again, if you're talking about a revenue number, it's really hard for me to think about because no one knew, or I didn't know it. I knew our ending MRR, but again, of course, to figure out the revenue, that's the average across a period, and it just wasn't a number we looked at. On that number, I think that says that LiveChat is either doing it really right or really wrong, and it could be both or neither. That sort of goes to our point about whether you want fast growth or efficient growth.

The reason that no one cares about GAAP or IFRS numbers is that, rightly or wrongly, the belief is that a year ceases to color a full picture of what's happening at a business. You acquire these customers; you expect them to stay for multiple years. It makes sense that the revenue you get from a customer in one year doesn't have a huge bearing on their full value and, therefore, what you would pay to acquire them. There's a version of the world in which you say LiveChat is underspending, and in spending a bit more, it could grow much more quickly, acquiring many more customers. If you wanted to maximize for growth, in terms of Amazon's speed of revenue growth, I think they're doing it wrong.

On the other hand, if you wanted just, to your point, return on invested capital, maybe they're doing it, really right. I think it could be that they're just playing a different game from the other companies. Certainly, compared to other industries I've worked in, how cheap the low-hanging fruit is or how easy it is to acquire the first-in customers in a year, and how hard it is to acquire the marginal customers, is just very stark for these types of SaaS businesses. If you were to say we're not going to do the hard stuff, we're just going to pick the super easy stuff, I imagine you could have had an extremely profitable business, which I think is what we see here.

### But this is somewhat unique in that this is Poland. It’s still relatively cheap labor, even though the difficulty finding software engineers that you see here across San Francisco and the West Coast, is playing out in many other markets as well, including Poland. It's an issue but not quite as difficult as it is here.

The other part is if you're not trying to build new stuff. At so many of these companies, the concepts are to grow the team, as opposed to, to make your margin larger you just keep the team or you have some way of maintaining some very small new feature teams.

### These guys are, slowly, but not quite on the same basis as many others. LiveChat is the main product, but the other interesting product that they've been developing is ChatBot. The company seems to have a more often optimistic view of the market size of ChatBot. The opportunity sets within that for them are just as fragmented according to them. The point is, they are spending some on developing newer products. They want to keep the LiveChat product going while they develop these three other main products. ChatBot is the newer one; they've got something called HelpDesk and KnowledgeBase. It’s a much smaller company, relative to many others. Before I forget, you mentioned MRR. What was, typically, the MRR that you shot for, if you remember MRR at Intercom?

Intercom averaged $5,000 I think; it was in that range. Single-digit thousands.

### These guys have only about 30,000 paying customers right now. That gives you some idea of how small they are relative to many of the other players. But MRR has been growing up steadily here.

The other thing is, and this was certainly the case at Intercom, the average and the median were extremely different, so you get that number through a lot of smaller customers and a few very large customers.

### As you think about Intercom’s challenges, primarily from a competition standpoint, does any specific name jump out at you? If you could look around the corner at who might be coming for the market, who would it be?

The name that jumps out is Zendesk; that's the big competitor. Intercom has got some nice differentiation, and it's very hard for Zendesk to compete with being as slick and integrated and all the rest of it. It's just a matter of how fast they can push and how much of their market they can take. There's a whole bunch of the Zendesk market that Intercom is not interested in, like the phone stuff and in person, and I think they'll continue to carve off a piece of that, and it's a question of how fast and how big that is.

In terms of people coming after them, I think it's a question of verticalization. There's this company, Gorgias, number one live chat for Shopify. It’s so good. I think it’s incredible because it's so focused on ecommerce. It does all the stuff, ties into all integrations, and it's got a few little extra features that just work really well. It's spelled funnily, G-O-R-G-I-A-S.

Again, it's like all the sort of same stuff but just for ecommerce. It also works well; it’s a domain space that chatbots work really well in. Chatbots kind of work or don’t work, depending on what you want them to do. Ecommerce is excellent because, say you’re on an ecommerce website, there’s a pretty limited range of questions you’re going to ask. This is even more true if we plug in a bunch of information about your purchase history. Gorgias plugged into Shopify, so here you come, and you've just bought something, and we gave you a shipping estimate of two days ago, and you're on the website, it doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out what you're probably asking about; where's my stuff?

You compare that to either these guys, In Practise, or even Intercom themselves; their customers ask technical, difficult, complicated questions about how the product works and all this other stuff. The machinery just doesn't work well on those kind of questions. That's the other piece with ecommerce; the chat piece can solve a lot of these questions.

It's partly machine learning, but it's also having the context because so much of it is, are you there? I'd like help. My ability to guess what's going on there is pretty limited with the small amount of information I have. Still, if I know from a cookie who you are and if you've bought something, I can make much better guesses about what you're asking about, and my ability to resolve that is substantially higher. That's the trick for a chatbot or automatic ticket resolution stuff; having a context of who this customer is, where they are on the journey and what happened recently.

Also, they're very high signal. If you think of somebody that's bought Intercom or bought LiveChat, if they're chatting in, what might they want to ask? It's probably something about the product or maybe the billing; it's kind of hard to guess. With commerce, it's pretty straightforward. How much is this? Do you have this other version? Can I have another color? Can I have a discount? The limited domain space is why I like Gorgias and, plugged into Shopify, is just smart business.

Drift, again, did an awesome job of positioning where they were all about sales use case. We'll just see that continue. Intercom started when messaging started. It started the same year as iMessage. Initially, they did all sorts of stuff. Now they're focused on the support space for digital products where the in-product messaging is valuable. We'll just see that continue.

### You already mentioned this, and it's an issue that keeps coming up when I look at LiveChat, and that is all these freemium products. There are so many of them that offer the same thing. Chat is part of it, and of course, if there is a serious financial institution or somebody who is more careful about the data, they're probably not going to go that route. They're probably going to go with Intercom or LiveChat or one of the bigger players. But the question is, a couple of years ago, I remember when Facebook came out with Facebook Messenger, the stock price of LiveChat went down. This was three or four years ago. All these big techs now have their own messenger options. At Intercom, do they worry that somebody is coming around the corner hitting them from a blind spot?

Not really. Intercom integrates; they’ve just announced that they’ve integrated with WhatsApp. I think it's probably a bit half-baked, I don't know what that team is doing, but the chat bubble is great. The benefit that Facebook brings is identity, so they know who the other person on the other side is, and they can have a place to respond to. They don't have to ask for a phone number, like you might see in SMS, which is how you deal with consumers; you can put it back to Facebook Messenger, which is nice and it's kind of helpful.

But as I say, chats are a little bit like surveys or a database, it's one part of it, but actually, it's the workflows that are valuable. Let's say you're a big company. How do you deal with these Facebook chats coming in? What do I do? How do I prioritize them? How do I reassign them? How do I make sure that they are managed? How do I allocate them randomly across six people? It's the workflow stuff that's important and Facebook aren’t going to build that out. It's going to be a plug-in kind of thing. I think the other part of it that for certain segments, I’m thinking of retail, that could work okay, but is that the most important? Maybe for a low engagement ecommerce that could be helpful.

### That’s not the primary focus?

Actually, I think it isn’t the primary focus but more what they bring, isn’t necessarily the most important part of it. I’m sure there are places where the combination of free is useful. But for larger businesses – let’s say you’re a specialty D2C ecommerce – you’ve probably got pretty focused kinds of propositions. If people want to buy your stuff, then they're happy to give a phone number and an address or something else.

It's one of those things that makes sense. You can message with businesses, and you can message Facebook, but do you want to use the same messaging necessarily? I use my email address for work to enter a lot of products, but it's my work email address. No one texts me for work stuff; that's just not how it works.

So we start to get into the conversation about personal versus professional identity and that kind of stuff. I don’t know about Facebook. I think WhatsApp is more interesting in that sense. I think it's more integrated, and we see a lot of this small commerce happening in China. I think that's super interesting, and there's some integration. These are probably physical retail stores, small retailers, barbers, that kind of stuff; physical service providers messaging with their customers. Again, Intercom isn’t a physical business, which is why there are so many verticals in this whole thing.

### In terms of competition, you've got Zendesk and potentially a few others that may be coming at it, but from a product, additional options standpoint, for example, LiveChat doesn't integrate with voice? They hand it over to this French company that does this transfer of voice from text. I forget the name of it. It's also a private company, a couple of guys. It seems to have a very good reputation in the space. But LiveChat has drawn a hardline and said we're not going to go to voice. We're going to hand it over to this other team that does voice, but everything in text form we will handle. As I said, these guys have slowly started offering a couple of other products, ChatBot being a bigger one; HelpDesk may be coming right behind. If you take the road that you are on while at Intercom, and take this other cap that says imagine the future, what product features do you think would be attractive from Intercom’s standpoint or LiveChat?

I’m sure they’re doing this; they’ve got some real focus of a specific customer that they sell to. They’re probably adjacent to something, so there would be some CRM, or in the case of Gorgias, it's Shopify. With Intercom, it could be HubSpot or Salesforce. At Zendesk, it's usually them themselves, but it would be something they’re kind of adjacent to. I would make that integration super easy, super simple, and I would make it work well. There is a surprising amount of friction getting those integrations right and working well. It's amazing how much you can win by doing that part well and getting information between two systems. In 2021, it's still a hard problem that there is a lot of value in solving. I think the stuff they’re thinking about, HelpDesk, KnowledgeBase, makes sense. If you look at other adjacent products, they do a lot of that kind of stuff too, so that's sort of sensible.

The smaller you are, the more opinionated you can be as well, so you still want to have those customers. Gorgias are for ecommerce and especially on Shopify. If you're not doing that, then you're not for them. But it means if you are for them, it’s like well you could try with Intercom, but like, well we've got a Shopify integration; it isn't doing all the things you wanted it to. Just getting it right for the little tweaks and turns, getting it right, is important in any kind of vertical software. Then I’d try to find a really valuable workflow feature. KnowledgeBase is fine, but there's not a lot of value in that. HelpDesk same thing. If you’re already buying something, they’ll drive another 10% out of the MRR or whatever, but that's fine. ChatBot is interesting for that, where it’s like can we save \[unclear 0:51:56\]? These are small teams, so maybe not, so it’s probably not valuable in that sense. You could think about whether these people are spending on paid marketing; is there a paid marketing integration we could make work well?

I’d just try and pick a niche and wallow into that niche and build out a couple of features that people that work in that niche would really love and instantly recognize. One, it drives down acquisition cost because, again, we're pursuing this capital-light strategy, but secondly, it drives up the price you can charge a bit. Because it's like, we're like Intercom, but we're slightly better because we're focused on your use case. And the stuff we don't do that Intercom does, you don’t care about that anyway, so it’s not a downside. I know that’s a bit of a general answer, and it’s where I’ve tried to be thoughtful about the chatbot thing because It's either a fun gimmick that's got low value or it's an incredibly high value, depending on how it’s implemented. Is it a bit of automation on the website saving a bit of time? Essentially, a chatbot is like a conversational form. It's nice, but it's about as valuable as a form, which is to say it's worth a bit but not much. Whereas if you can truly take out people, we're talking large value. A support ticket is worth between say $5 and $50, so maybe a conversation should be charged at half that, between $2.50 and $25.

### It’s still a very small product for them – just a few thousand customers – but the rate at which they're growing it seems to be pretty steep. There, the integration is pretty smooth. Say somebody sitting in Europe, an eight-hour time difference, wants to know about this product, where it is, and what the heck is wrong, the chatbot answers the questions. Then in the morning, when the agent comes, they're able to pick it up and type out the detailed answer. The integration is fairly smooth where, once that happens, even after that, say the customer is not satisfied and wants to talk, then live chat stops. Somebody else will have to integrate, and that is left to the customer itself.

### In the last couple of minutes, from a market standpoint that is highly fragmented depending on how you look at it, is Salesforce the vacuum cleaner that’s going to suck up all these guys?

I don’t think so.

### Or is there a need to have all these standalone players? LivePerson seems to be a little troubled financially. I forgot to mention, and you probably already know this, but Zendesk moved from the Netherlands. Before they moved, they made an offer to acquire LiveChat in Poland, which was rejected. They don't necessarily compete, but that's just FYI. It was a potential target at one point. My general question is, there are still way too many players, so highly fragmented and, at least on the LiveChat side, the size of the market seems to be somewhat capped. ChatBot is maybe increasing. Is there a need for these players, or do you think there will be CRM and a whole bunch of other standalone players?

That's an interesting question. I'm thinking of it out loud a bit.

### That’s all I want.

Let's look at email marketing as the analogy, where waves of consolidation have happened, but at JumpCloud, we’re using Pardot. They bought Pardot which is an email template thing, and I think the companies that don't know what they're doing, they'll just buy a Salesforce solution. Still, there are more and more companies. Klaviyo is focused on ecommerce; Iterable has made a ton of progress, and Marketo continues to be kind of its own thing; there are still a bazillion email products. This is total speculation, and it's not baked-in theory, but I think because of the way we communicate and as communication technology continues to evolve, have we seen any evolution with that? Some companies do multichannel well. Do they do email and SMS? Do they do email and push? No one does all of these well; everyone’s got to pick where they’re focused. I think Pardot kind of sucks, and its integration of Salesforce is the one thing that matters. If you don't really care, and you just want to send some email, it’s fine. But I think because the customer experience is evolving, it’s increasingly in product, SMS, push, all this kind of stuff; we're seeing this constant creation of new companies.

Podium is a really interesting, large company that does customer support. Still, it's very much SMS-focused for some retail businesses, and so all the things that we mentioned apply, but it’s all about SMS. Intercom does a little SMS but not a whole lot. So I think we will continue to see a focus on continuing adoption here because it's not a platform. These things aren't platforms like Salesforce, and it’s not about like wow, we just all choose one thing and build on top of it and customize. I think that we are seeing continuing innovation in the way that people communicate and in communication technology.

I think finally, the way that you talk to your customers is a super important part, right on the front of the experience. For example, for running your PRI business, there’s probably a million work fine; just set it up right. The hard part is just picking one amongst many same things. The way you talk to your customers is super important for the experience of how that looks and the flows you want to create, everybody's got an opinion about what they want to do. CRM probably has a pretty standard sales flow, just use the one out of the box, and Salesforce probably works fine. There is not this crazy customization, whereas, in customer experience, there is a huge amount of customization that you want, in terms of what it plugs into and how.

There is always some data or information about states of customer or PRI involved, the connection to systems, and shuttling around. The consolidation hasn’t seemed to have happened a huge amount in email. Certainly, there have been winners in different spaces, but it seems as if in every space, there is a different winner, and I don’t know why that wouldn’t happen in chat as well. I think it’s like email or SMS. It's just that a new channel has evolved, which is website chat, and we will continue to have a wide range of players, I guess. Certainly, Salesforce does have a chat product?

### But the dollar amount for a 100-employee company to sign up for Salesforce has got to be an enormous waste of money and resources.

Exactly.

### Maybe it’s not even affordable. This is a relatively tiny company. For me, as an investor, it doesn't matter whether it's tiny or large. All I care about, from a competition standpoint, is do they have an edge.

Yes.

### Because there are freemiums, and other players like Intercom and Zendesk and a few others. From a competition standpoint, I'm always wary when it comes to live chat. Many of my other portfolio companies don't have that kind of a competitive threat always lurking in the background.

Yes.

### But still, they have been able to grow, not quite at the same rate as some of the other SaaS companies, but it is healthy enough, generating pretty healthy returns, and so far, it's been working out okay. I'd like them to come out and not be aggressive, but a little more confident in how they approach the North American market. As a Polish company, they have been a little soft.

My suspicion is they have got some edge, just by those numbers. They've done something. Something is working. I'm not super familiar with it, candidly, but it's out there. I think it's more a matter of them finding it. The other thing is they may not know it. Like most markets, it doesn’t require that you understand your product market further; it's just something that happens.

### The biggest thing seems to be they don’t spend as much on SG&A. They spend on actual programmers, but the actual marketing aspect, which seems to be a big spend for all the other players, they don’t do that. Since you went to business school, you know the push-pull marketing strategy; these guys seem to have the pull strategy and very little on marketing spend, and that's why the SG&A margin is so low. They save so much on it, but then growth also comes at a price, and they're fine with it so far.