# LiveChat Software: A Partner Perspective

by #InPractise 

_Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise._

### I’d like to know a bit more about you and your thoughts on LiveChat and the entire space. In terms of my background, I run a fairly concentrated global portfolio and LiveChat is one of my holdings. I’ve talked to and met the company a number of times; I was in Warsaw earlier this year and met the team at their headquarters. I’d like to know a bit more about the space, the competition in particular, and how LiveChat stacks up with the competition; strengths, weaknesses, areas you think they can do better etc.

I’ve been running a digital advertising marketing agency since 2004. My first business started in 1994 so I’ve been in digital since then. At one point, I worked for IBM and whilst there, I was worked on developing tools similar to LiveChat, so I have a lot of history in the industry. This isn’t my first meeting like this; I’ve met with stakeholders before but anonymously. This is the first time where you’re telling me who you are.

### It’s actually good preparation that you’ve done some of these in the past. Before we go through the questions, perhaps you could tell me a little bit more about your background, and how you came across LiveChat, in the first instance?

I’m not a software developer; as a professional I’m a strategist, a business owner and a marketer. I always had to figure out ways to do re-selling and if I could develop and architect a solution that would be wrapped around a product then I’ve added value. I’m known for that in the industry; I’m the guy that will create something out of nothing and sell it because I can build in things like training, set up, implementation and strategy. I quickly came up with a solution for LiveChat which a lot of other partners have done in the past; it’s a way to make more money, not just selling subscription.

Basically, we had several clients who had a lot of traffic coming through their website with ecommerce and it was obvious that, if you add any kind of engagement platform – from scheduling software to a LiveChat or Chatbot – it automatically creates revenue. The user case is obvious. There are other big brands out there like Constant Contact – I won an award for them in 2014 for the best integrated marketing campaign and they’ve since been acquired for $1 billion. We have a good channel reputation so I’ve done some consultant work for vCita which is another tool we use, a scheduling platform in Israel. I connected with them at a partner conference and started selling their software. I have done consulting for the partner channels because that can be a great and lucrative revenue source for these companies that don’t necessarily have the bandwidth to go for the local markets. They’re more national/international and they have their trialing, standard sales automation approach.

What I do is add value, and in doing so, extend the life of the subscription. That’s why partners are incredibly important, because they add longevity and value to the company. We’re also basically sales reps. I run live events or webinars in-person and that really helps to add more value and put them on the map. It may represent a small percentage of the revenue but it’s of a higher quality; where partners are involved, the attrition is typically less.

### You worked with not just LiveChat or Constant Contact but many other similar applications; how many do you think?

I’m currently doing my own auditing and assessing as I’m coming up with a new strategy around automation campaigns and as such, I’ve installed an app called Leadfeeder. Basically, it will tell me what corporations are visiting the website based on an IP address. For example, I can see that somebody from Alberta Health Services is visiting the website which is a really big deal. The app tells me where they come from and who they key players are through LinkedIn; if it’s a corporation, they are probably looking for a corporate gig. If you have business development happening in your company, a tool like this is absolutely critical. That is a product which is part of a core of seven to eight products that I’ve developed and created that really integrate into my platform.

I’m probably going to rebrand LiveChat to be Mapchat. Even though it can still be public and known as LiveChat to my clients, I’m going to pitch it as Mapchat as we have our map website builder powered by Duda, which is website building technology. At the end of the day, I selectively choose which partnerships I want public and which ones I want white labeled, depending on if we’re doing the billing of not. I have probably 20 in total but I’m more focused on the ones that are more prominent, more integrated and regular. There are about seven or eight of them that are really critical to keeping our platform sustainable and ahead of its time. Our website builder doesn’t touch WordPress; we are a modern website design agency, we deploy websites in half the time, at half the price and get double the results. I know it sounds really cheesy but that is what we do.

LiveChat are an industry leader, you can’t ignore them. They also have the most relevant brand name out there. Their website is ranking for over 30,000 keywords organically, just in the United States alone. I don’t know if you know about the back-end of these kinds of things, but this tells you how mature a company truly is. They have a really high-end website, one of the best in the world. They’re in the top 1,000 in the financial listing we use so that gives you a good understanding of what is happening for organic keywords and so on.

I’ve known about LiveChat and I needed something that would amplify our engagements for websites and we had played around with several other tools before. The key, for me, is that I like to know that for continuity’s sake, if for example I exit my business, my clients will still have support. The billing is another aspect, so direct billing, where a client can purchase and pay direct to LiveChat and we earn a revenue share; ‘revshare’ in my partner world. We’re not affiliates; we’re partners, it’s very different. Will the clients still be supported directly? Is there direct billing? How is the quality of support inside these vendor-partner relationships? If a client of mine had to go direct, would they be frustrated or would they get the answers?

LiveChat has good quality support, it’s very well documented and also updated frequently. Little things are constantly being added, such as new integrations and app store enhancements. Recently, they made it so you can sign on to one account and have access to all of their products under one login, which is a sign that the suite is coming together, which is really important. I told them that, the last time I spoke to their Senior Product Manager. You’ve probably seen that I was published on their Partner page, even though this is me being a cheerleader for the partner program. We did land a $50,000 deal from a LiveChat session and they are still actively engaged with us now; it’s now about a $5,000 a month managed client. He came to us through LiveChat, and we’ve also helped other clients generate some really amazing results.

> In terms of measuring the quality of LiveChat’s partner program, I look at how easy is it to create new accounts? What is the revenue share percentage breakdown? Do they give us a marketplace to publish our website on and add value added services? Of all the partner programs out there, I’d say they are right up there as one of the top available. The only little technical glitch that I think they’ll be able to resolve soon, is that as a partner, I want to be able to log in to one master account and then have access to all my client accounts because when I’m adding value to these clients, I don’t want them to contact LiveChat. I want them to contact me so that I can update the platform for them, do some training for them, add some extra revenue to my book of business and be their concierge level service.

Currently, if a client changes a password, I can’t get into their account. They know about this; it’s just the way they have structured the partner program side of the technology. I can still get into client accounts. I’m actually in a client account right now and can see it has a number of helpdesk tickets that haven’t been answered because they are so busy, which is a good problem but it makes me nervous. As a managed client, we want to be able to easily update all the products, however many they have.

In terms of increasing revenue share, I think they are at a healthy number. It’s hard to go any higher when they are doing it for the lifetime of the account which is good. There are some programs out there that just cover the first year, such as Leadfeeder. I advised them that they’re not going to keep partners around if we’re only generating off the first year if we’re doing the work; we’re doing tier one support. Those are some of the things that I look at.

Michal is my contact there, he’s a classic Partner Account Manager. When I first interacted with them, their quality and professionalism was obvious. They really value their partner program; they’re very professional and remind me of Constant Contact which also has a strong, dedicated partner approach. As a partner, I don’t need a lot of help, but what I do need is to have them do things on my account. I don’t like to do trials, so if I’m selling the product, don’t force me into a 14-day trial with my clients. As such, they made the adjustment on my ability to sell it to a two-day window so I automatically added credit card and billing information to convert the account and set the whole thing up so we are no longer talking about trials. Our strategies are very different; I’m not chasing people for subscriptions. We do very well with our residual income, that’s how I consider it on the revenue side of things. Residual is like a foundation revenue, a root of the whole business but we need to make sure we can set these things up so trials aren’t part of it.

### What is the split on the revenue share between LiveChat and you?

We generate 25%.

### Can you give me a general profile of your average client? Size, type of company etc.

Mostly they are small businesses, which can be a bit of a challenge. Single users are majorly subscribing; I need to get out of that environment and pivot further into a multi-user experience, but – and this is an industry wide issue – some clients get 50 to 60 chats a month, some only get five. A realtor won’t get as many right now as the industries are changing, so they maybe get five to 10. In every industry, some don’t want to be sitting on a live chat. For example, I had a client who had a dog grooming/caring business, Barking Good, who cancelled the account because they basically had no bandwidth to deal with using LiveChat; she’d reached her capacity. If a single user has to hire an administrative person, they’re not going to be manning the live chat; they need to deal with other more urgent matters in the business operation.

I’ve even been approached by a company that offered to do all the LiveChat sessions for clients. They said they’d qualify them to get clients booked, and answer the questions on their behalf, so there’s a whole other after-market involved with this type of thing. I think I’m going to pivot my strategy for clients who have a certain amount of website traffic. Firstly, you have to have X amount of website traffic to make this work. Secondly, it’s the type of traffic and what kind of business you are running, but I think we’ll start to shift to Chatbot first, and then we’ll introduce LiveChat.

I’m updating a case study with LiveChat because I want to reflect something more accurate and current; it’s a manufacturing company called GN Corporations. They get about 50 or so chats a month and they are doing seven figure deals; you may wonder who would do live chat with them but it works. The point I’m making is that out of the 50 chats, maybe five of them could really be taken more seriously, so why do we need a human to man the chat if it can be done automatically first? What I’m trying to do is expand the overall revenue which is part of the solution.

> If I can get Chatbot in place, deal with all the filtering out and get better quality leads routed to a live chat or an appointment booking platform, then we’re good. I’m going to change that and, hopefully, then won’t see as many cancellations on LiveChat for the reason that they simply don’t have the bandwidth or are only available for a couple of hours a day. They see $50 to $60 a month as a big deal for a small business, but it really isn’t. It’s just one of those things where if they don’t think they’re getting optimal value from it then they’re not typically going to want to keep it, so I have to look more at the multi-user experience.

We have a couple of clients using more than one user. There are also situations where we’ll have one user that is a shared account across the business owners so they can both log in at the same time to expand their coverage. That’s also not an ideal situation; they should really be paying for each user.

### You’ve already answered one of my questions which was whether when you offer more than just LiveChat as a product; it looks like you’re already working on Chatbot. What about the other two, Helpdesk and Knowledge Base?

Just keep in mind that the core product is LiveChat. All the other products are extensions or derivatives of LiveChat, that’s how I’m interpreting it. In terms of the Helpdesk product, unless there is some kind of revolutionary expansion, we can get away with using live chats with the tickets it has and different departments that can be set up. There are obviously more features in Helpdesk but we haven’t really pushed it. The Knowledge Base piece is another aspect that takes me in a different direction; that could work really well for a SaaS client, a client that needs that well documented, step-by-step process of how you do all the things you need to do in that environment. In terms of my business priorities, we built standards on how to set up LiveChat. We don’t just look at LiveChat documentation; we have to take ownership of what we’re doing in order to be a true solution provider, a leader, otherwise why are we doing this?

When you look at a product like Chatbot, it’s a beast to set up and a larger implementation takes more time, costs more money, but can do a lot more for your site. Even though Knowledge Base and Helpdesk are actually pretty easy to get going, the user case for our types of clients is low, so I’d rather just pivot into Chatbot. Again, we need a staff member to be able to man the set up of that, and Chatbots are more complicated because they deal with all things automatically. It’s a lot more vast; you can do a lot more things with it. Because LiveChat already channels the ticketing system, it’s not as urgent to think about getting into a Helpdesk environment. I can’t say I’m really pushing all the other products; I do want to, I want to do events that showcase all of them, because we can easily do the other two, it’s just Chatbot that is more demanding.

### The 25% share that you referenced, is it the same across all products?

It is only across the two; Chatbot and LiveChat. I have free licensing, which I requested as a partner, that Michal was able to accommodate. It’s for the purpose of us using the product, learning how to use the product and using it as a tool for developing our own standards and workflows so we can actually support it, break it, fix it and go through the process of learning how to master it. I asked them to do the same for all of their tools which they’ve done and that’s been useful.

We have different solutions. On our website, if you want a one user simple set up LiveChat starts at $250. If you want us to set up the Apple messenger integration, then it’s $500 for one user. If you want multiple divisions or departments, then it’s more at $750 and it goes up to $1,000. It takes two to seven days, depending on how big the set up is. It’s an easy turnaround; we use Google Tag Manager with all of our clients so it’s an easy, five-minute installation to get the script installed and then everything has to be customized. Chatbot can give us all the canned responses and we can use them in LiveChat or from LiveChat to Chatbot; they work well to transfer some of the set up work which is good.

### You said you have seven or eight different applications that you work with. Is there anybody else, other than LiveChat, that does this customer communication?

{audio:0:38.59} The vCita tool does have two-way communication; it’s not real time but it’s basically a messaging client portal center. There is no live chat integration there. We’re using Klaviyo for email marketing and Constant Contact, that’s all email marketing. Klaviyo is text messaging too. Within LiveChat though, there is Messenger, Apple business messenger, WhatsApp and a couple of other tools. In terms of real time messaging, we have some clients using Facebook Messenger installed to their website. We don’t really focus on Shopify – not that we’re not into ecommerce; I’ve been doing e-commerce since it all began – it’s just that we don’t like using platforms that are too complicated or expensive for a small business to get started and get to where they really want to be. Shopify does have their own live chat built-in now which affects us being able to add something to that because the data is natively integrated into the ecommerce platforms to give a better insight into buying behaviors and so on. Another client, HubSpot, also has a chat built in to that.

### What about the other like Lightpurse and a recent one called Freshworks? Have you come across those?

We used to use Freshworks. The LiveChat development team in Poland, they’re solid and they have a solid product. Some of these others like Talk – the free one – destroys the speed of a website, it’s just brutal. WordPress is already a liability, it’s a problem to begin with, and you then install a product that slows it down more. In my industry, there is something called bounce rate; you have to reduce the bounce rate otherwise people leave your site and you’re paying for traffic which then leaves and you end up with nothing. We played around with Talk and I knew that was like the WordPress of live chat; their freemium version is a garbage product, really clunky, hard to install, set up and get going, just not a good user experience. Bad programming, glitchy, buggy, hacky; we stay away from things like that.

Intercom was another one I was looking at; its price point is a bit higher, and they have different features.

> I love the fact that LiveChat is a single product because we can integrate that into pretty much any environment we want; it’s expansive and you can integrate a multitude of different channels. I’ve been pitching it as your go-to messenger service for your business, it now has Google Business Profile integration so it consolidates your inbox to some degree. It’s not the full catch-all of all things. In social media, it’s tough to be that person and have all the DMs coming in as there are a lot of social products. We use something called Sendible which has an integrated inbox but it doesn’t cover all the things that LiveChat would cover, for example.

If more businesses adopted Apple Messenger, that would be really cool because it’s a built-in native feature that LiveChat spent time doing which is very unique I think, a great value-add, and it gets us a little bit more away from Google, which I think is healthy. It actually creates more autonomy and less reliance on that.

Zendesk is another big player, they own the space; Helpdesk have been around for a long time, they’re pretty good at it but again I think that is for a different type of client. We really have the small business focus.

### In terms of the progression of communication to the point where the text has to be picked up as a voice by one of the helpdesk/customer service people, LiveChat doesn’t have its own switch over to a voice capability. Do you think that’s an issue or is it something they can add on top of what they offer?

It’s obvious that we’re heading in that direction. I’m showing you an integration of a platform on my website right now where I can see people searching on the site and it allows me to look at their real time user experience; what are they doing right now? I can see that somebody is actually building their website; he’s doing some on-page SEO. Now, in this context, I have the ability to initiate a real-time video audio experience without him even knowing I’m even watching him right now. This is using a product called HelloMedia; the owner approached me to see if I’d be open to demonstrating it and seeing if it would be a great way for me to utilize it. It integrates with LiveChat, and LiveChat has other integrations, like SnapCall.

Is this something that LiveChat should be doing right now? If I had to pick, to be honest with you, the thing I would put money into and develop further is to figure out a way to do SMS back and forth first. Texting communication is a lot easier for a consumer to adapt to versus real-time video. Unfortunately, people aren’t at a place yet where that is common practice, but they are for text messaging and DMs. If you’re ever trying to get hold of someone and you email them versus texting, you can wait three days for a reply to and email but if you text them, they’ll get back to you in five minutes.

### Are you saying LiveChat does not offer that texting capability right now?

No, it’s only being done through third-party integrations or Apple Business, or through the WhatsApp add-on. If we made our own integration of real-time texting that was native to the platform, or as a premium plan, that would be great. In terms of what we have right now, we have WhatsApp which is $80 a month to add the license; Twitter, Google Business, SnapCall, Instagram for Business, Slack, Telegram; they all have little add-ons. Chatbot is built-in and Facebook Messenger is built-in and free. You can end up with a lot of add-on expenses and these are the partners that are building these apps to the marketplace.

To do a consolidated in-box like this could save somebody a lot of time and keep them organized, but at the end of the day, it would be really cool if we had some kind of back-and-forth text-based messaging. That would be first, then I would say, let’s look at video and audio because you have to look at infrastructure costs and development and support costs for all of that; it’s a whole new world. From an overall business perspective, there’s going to be a challenge in adopting and training in it. Yes, it’s where we’re headed but if you can get the text piece there, I think that would be lucrative for us, strategically, and give us an edge.

I had a client who was using LiveChat and now they’re using a product called Chirp or RedChirp. They switched out of using LiveChat and are now using texting only and they have five times more volume in terms of texts and messages coming in. This is largely because of the 300 odd times a day we’re picking up our mobiles versus going on desktop or web-based activities. The end user has no idea that this is all being controlled by a central web browser, and that’s why it’s effective.

Just the other day I got a new lead from LiveChat, through the Apple Business Messenger. They didn’t know they were sending it off to LiveChat; they had no clue. I then sent them a link to book me, they booked me and I’ve just sent them an $8,000 proposal. It has to be a definite possibility in terms of a way forward; we’ll cannibalize a little bit of our app store but we’re not going to take business away from the Facebook Messengers and the Instagrams and WhatsApps of the world; we just don’t have our own built-in thing.

### Typically, for your average client, how long does it take to implement?

Three to five days; it’s actually three to five hours but there’s the time for clients to get back to you and so on. We set up the channels, we do the branding, we do the messaging, we set up some pre-canned responses for them, we do some training. It’s quick and easy; this is one of the fastest implementations we have. Most of our competitors may take three weeks, but I take pride in our ability to respond quickly, rapidly. It’s a quick turnaround, and if there is a group of them then we’ll do some group training; I literally only spend 20 minutes with them. I get them to download the mobile app, desktop app and then use the browser to demonstrate how you go in, set up your schedules etc. I sell the medium plan, the one that comes with the scheduler, and that way, if they want they can upgrade or downgrade, but they can’t cancel. It’s also the plan that comes with the most balanced features.

### Have any of your clients had any sort of problems post-implementation? I’m sure you would have taken care of it before going to LiveChat or a technician directly?

The only issue is that we are unable to change the user name. For the login of an account, you either have to set up a new account under a new email or you just deal with whatever it is you deal with. That’s it; it’s very rare that we’ve ever had any issues with LiveChat, it’s been a good, easy to work with platform. That’s why I picked them, because I didn’t want headaches. I don’t want my staff to be bogged down having to talk to technicians for tier one issues; anything tier one we need to be able to take on ourselves and deal with. Tier two is infrastructure, things like services that are down or APIs are offline, those kinds of things. I haven’t had any issues with LiveChat; it’s been very good, solid, no problems.

### You mentioned Zendesk and Freshworks and Talk and other companies – for the typical client you described where LiveChat is more appealing – do you see anybody else in the marketplace apart from those few that you’ve described?

I think Shopify, because when you look at LiveChat, even though its original intent wasn’t just for ecommerce, today, it’s ecommerce first. I tell clients all the time, if you have an ecommerce storefront, you need someone there. If you go to Home Depot, they’re going to ask you what department you’re looking for, so if you don’t have someone manning your website, then you’re throwing money away. We’re not going directly after Shopify but they now have a live chat thing so that’s an issue for us. Any ecommerce platform that’s doing any kind of live chat, that’s a threat because of the integration between the two, email marketing and ecommerce; the best combination in marketing. If you do an email campaign and you have ecommerce and you have a live chat person, it’s going to work out great.

Other than that, other social platforms like Messenger have been annoying because it does act very similarly to LiveChat. It doesn’t have anywhere close to the same features but Meta need to do what they’re doing, they haven’t had a platform that goes with it so it all ties in to their overall strategy. Once I’ve made my decision around what I’m going with for PALs – Partner Alliance Leaders – I’m generally happy unless I’m hearing on the front end that I’m losing business to a competitor. Wickes has been a bit of a thorn in my side, for good and bad reasons. I think they have one built-in and are consolidating their platform in a way that is providing more value overall.

Mailchimp was acquired by Intuit so we’ll wait and see what they’re up to - I know that Intuit QuickBooks, generally, are a little clunky when it comes to development, they’re very slow. I’ve been a QuickBooks Pro advisor for a long time and, in terms of the product itself, they’ll fix bugs before they try to create new features. We need to figure out more of a holistic solution with the whole live chat thing. Maybe they consolidate some of their individual products into one subscription which incorporates all of them, like Microsoft Office. It’s just one product now; good luck finding Word by itself. If you do, it’s pretty much the same prices as Office.

### How do your clients make their payments? Assuming all your clients are in Canada?

No, we have clients in the States. The billing is solid; it’s very easy to upgrade, downgrade, cancel, self-serve, update billing information. It’s not using any third party, that I can see, and I don’t think it’s using Stripe either. There are a lot of companies that do. vCita uses Recurly; you end up going out of vCita and into Recurly, which can be confusing. So no, their billing is solid, they’re really good. The only thing, from a partner perspective, is when we create a new account, I cannot create the password for a new account. The client gets an activation email which I tell them to forward to me and I will provision the account because I already have the billing information; I’m not going to wait around for the client to add that, I go and do that for them. I don’t have a way on the partner side to do that; that’s a bit of an open loop. But from the client’s side, a lot of my clients can just go in, update the billing on their own – such as updating credit cards – and it’s fine, easy, no problems.

### If somebody were to force you to come up with, say three major negatives of LiveChat, what would they be? You’ve already talked about the positives; it’s pretty clear you like everything.

I guess, in terms of the product itself, as mature as the market place is, it can be pricey if you add on a few of the bundles. I wouldn’t say that’s against LiveChat, specifically, but it would be good to level out the pricing somehow and look at maybe restructuring the apps and integration. Currently, they charge $80 a month for adding on WhatsApp but yet Facebook Messenger is free; it’s owned by the same company, so why is that? Basically, we need to have more control over pricing on the marketplace. Maybe they have premium apps, a standard rate, free apps and then another version. Even Zendesk – which is an integration – is free; we should be charging for Zendesk if they are a competitor. The market place is inconsistent with the pricing. Even Shopify has the integration; it’s free so it helps us in one way. Even Pipedrive, which is a CRM that I use, have their own live chat built in. That’s definitely something I would look at in terms of leveling it out where we’re in a little bit more control of the marketplace and what’s going on there.

In terms of other negatives, I think they made a shift on their pricing so there are some issues with some clients looking at it and considering it a bit pricey on a per user basis. Real-time ecommerce integration isn’t something I can see. Actually, I don’t think we’ve been able to set that up. You can create goals, but it would be good to get actual financial figures. There is a sales tracker here but it’s a little complicated, it’s just something I need to look into further. Sometimes, setting things up can be a bit confusing. It’s a pretty simple platform when you’ve done something a few times but it has different chat widgets and boosters and all these other features. If I gave it to an end user to set up on their own, it would take them a couple of weeks to get it done, with routing rules and so on. Overall, though it’s got good security, you can ban customers if you want, credit card masking if you accept payments; it’s well developed, it’s a mature product.

In terms of negativity, maybe better stronger integration with all the rest of the products; for example, single purchase and to make it easier for us to change a user name, just little things like that.

### In the most recent earnings release, one of the things they highlighted was that they are about to get a patent in the US on some new product. Any wild guess as to what that might be?

I would say it is maybe something to do with texting. I’m just speculating; nobody has said anything to me. The other thing too is Helpdesk and Knowledge Base; we don’t earn any revenue share on Helpdesk and Knowledge Base that I’m aware of. I can’t create a license for those through my partner portal. If they want to see more growth in that from a partner perspective, then they should open that up to allow for revenue share. It isn’t very clear in their overall offerings.

### I’ll show you the press release; it’s on that same website where they have you as a profiled partner. It says, ‘Advanced process of obtaining new US patent’. I was wondering if you knew of anything; they haven’t disclosed what it is. I guess they will come out and say something soon and we’ll find out? I’m looking at this as an outsider investor in this company. I like the fact that the owners control the company, the founders are still running it, incredible growth, incredible margins but I’m also constantly concerned about competition, both premium and freemium.

They do have a very strong marketing presence; that is something that is helping us. From a relevance standpoint, LiveChat.com, it almost feels like we invented the whole thing. We have Knowledge Base, Helpdesk so you know that we have history but we have to stay fresh and innovative and that’s where you open up products like marketplace. There is definitely a lot of movement in those areas and that keeps us relevant and integrated across platforms so we can adopt more users.

I think that, from the partner channel side of things, where we’ve done joint events together and showcased the product and some integrations, opened it up in those ways, it gives partners exposure, it gives opportunity for us to take on some new clients. Ideally, we would just cast the net wide, we could go after LiveChat trialers who didn’t convert, go and re-engage them.

There is a tool called Builtwith.com which will give you the numbers in terms of all of the software on the internet and how many licenses and installations are happening onto websites each month. Therefore, each month, I know this for Freshdesk, LiveChat, Constant Contact, Scripts. It gives you all the background and that will give you a gauge in terms of knowing who are the players in each space and what their growth looks like from that perspective.