Each intelligent fanatic highlighted in this book owned a meaningful piece of their businesses. Their ownership position, combined with execution, gave them ultimate control over the long-term direction of the company. The only way to succeed in dominating a market for decades is to have long-term focus. Intelligent fanatics have what investor Tom Russo calls the capacity to suffer short-term pain for long-term gain. Like a chess player, a great CEO is thinking, spending and investing many steps and years ahead of the competition. As Jeff Bezos put it, "If we have a good quarter, it is because of the work we did three, four, five years ago. It is not because we did a good job this quarter." They build the infrastructure to support a larger business, which normally takes significant upfront investment that will lower profitability in the short-term. 

At Nucor, Ken Iverson stated, "Every decision we make as managers is rooted in long-term perspective." The company's compensation system, the capital investment program, and the way the company dealt with the capital markets all were aligned with that long-term view. Iverson often reminded his managers not to be seduced into a short-term mindset:
> We are not dogs on a leash, doing tricks to manage the stock price or maximize dividends quarter by quarter. We are eagles. We soar. If investor want to soar, too, they'll invest with us. The speculators, we don't need.

At QuikTrip, Chet Cadieux, son of Chester Cadieux, made it clear that "most everything we spend money on in any given day is important ten, fifteen, twenty years from now." Investments in new stores and store updates are extremely capital intensive. The average age of each QuikTrip store is 8.3 years, and each is updated every three years. Why does QuikTrip spends so much, only to tear their store down in less than a decade? Changes in traffic patterns and demographics necessitate store location updates and need to be kept up with to maintain the brand. Cadieux once said: "There is not a ROI on the planet that would justify it. But if you don't do that, that's how you end up with a huge chain of old stores, like how most convenient stores are."

Simon Marks' long-term view allowed Marks and Spencer to survive World War II and come out much stronger. He said: 
> The seeds planted just before the war, with the creation in 1936 of the Merchandise Development Department, had brought an important harvest; our brand named "Saint Michael" had established itself as the principle of quality mark in the country and share of the national expenditure on clothing had steeply risen to 10%.

Anheuser-Busch Inbev takes it a step further and says that the company is "driven by our passion to create a company that can stand the test of time and create value for our shareholders, not only for the next ten or twenty years but for the next one hundred years." Our mindset is truly long-term. The stronger a corporation's culture, the more likely a company can stand the test of time. Nucor, National Cash Register, Marks & Spencer, Southwest Airlines, Les Schwab Tire Centers, Costco (the current form of Price Club), Walmart, QuikTrip and many other corporations have stood the test of time purely on the strength of their cultures. 