# Low Price by Name

Ask where to buy cheap but reasonable quality furniture and you will likely be told IKEA. Ask about affordable women's fashion and the names Primark H&M and possibly Zara will crop up. When asked where to buy a cheap, quality pair of glasses, many Germans will likely mention Fielmann. Companies that can successfully forge a price-led model into a brand reputation for thrift go a long way to breaking the curse of low-cost vulnerability to competitive invasion. 

The success of low-priced brands depends on several factors, the first being a degree of product differentiation. Consumers seeking affordable but decent fashion or decorative items that are less standardized (like Jeans or sofas) will be influenced by factors such as fit and quality. So long as price is within budget, it is less likely that strict scrutiny will be applied to price, even if a cheaper sofa or pair of pants may be found down the street. Such price slack offsets the usual vulnerabilities for low-price-by-name business models.
The comparison between differentiated and commoditized products hints at a few conditions necessary for this achievement. 

Low price by name offerings need to be both similar and different: IKEA furnishings must be fairly standardized but still distinctive. Playing off quality and differentiation lets companies create products that can be sold at attractive prices without giving customers the ability to establish whether it really is the best deal in town.
Yet while such low-price branding offers a first line of protection to the economic model, additional protection may be needed. This is because such branding only works as long as operators can keep offering customers what they want, which is a fair and attractive deal. Doing so is not easy - and therein lies the secret, and the second source of protection.

Scale is essential. Success entails obtaining thousands of inputs from around the world coordinated in a complex fashion, at considerable cost. The model depends on continuous and rapid response to shifting demand, meaning understanding changing consumer preferences, having control of the supply chain, managing inventory effectively, and deftness in distribution. All this requires good designers, operation mavens, and synchronized information technology. 

Upstarts will struggle to do it all well. True, as technology and supply chain automation commoditizes these business models may become more vulnerable. They nevertheless appear to have sustainable competitive advantages that protect against the vulnerabilities of the basic low cost strategy.