A strategy of consistently low pricing is typically enabled by low unit costs. Some low-price businesses, however, achieve competitive advantage through several cost-saving small steps. When doing so translates into huge cumulative cost savings, the strategy punishes rivals and deters new entrants. We call this *low-cost squared*. 

Many companies that pursue low production costs achieve lowest-cost status - for a while. The more routine low-cost tactics give only short-term advantages because they can be copied. For example, pallets - portable wooden packing platforms - were first used for stocking merchandise in deep-discount retailers but are now a common sight at many supermarkets. Low-cost airlines like Southwest pioneered shorter aircraft turnaround times, but traditional airliners soon followed suit.

In contrast, low-cost squared companies construct a business model, organization, and culture that drives low cost in each step of every process throughout the operation. The depth of cost consciousness adds protection that ordinary cost-minimization tactics do not. It is not the individual steps alone but their combination that creates the competitive advantage. Costs are contained everywhere, from sourcing and distribution, all the way though to employee travel budgets. We look for these numerous sources of pricing advantages; the more there are, the more competitors will struggle to replicate the net effect.

To illustrate how low cost advantages consist of may small things added and squared, walk into a Costco store. Buildings are massive metal sheds in cheap suburban or rural locations. Lighting is cheap. Virtually all products sit on pallets - no shelving, stocking, or carting costs. There are no plastic bags. Stores only accept cash or Costco credit cards. While each saving may not account for much, in aggregate the cut is deep and  lets the company do one thing and do it best: offer the lowest price.

Traditional retailers struggle to replicate all of Costco's advantages through frugality though they copy what they can, like using pallets. Many are stuck in high-rent locales. Others invested considerably in display and presentation. Most opted long ago to accept alternative payment systems. Some have nowhere near the scale needed to challenge the Costco model.

Other example: [[Ryanair]]