Luxottica, founded in 1961 as a small manufacturer of components for the Italian optical industry, may not be a household name, but in the market for premium eyeglasses and sunglasses it is everywhere. Luxottica's stable of brands is iconic, encompassing Oakley and Ray-Ban, and it boasts a starry licensed portfolio featuring Armani, Bulgari, Burberry, Chanel, Polo Ralph Lauren, and Prada. In recent decades, the company has expanded through a series of brave but astute deals to become its sectors decisive global leader. 

Luxottica exemplifies successful [[Forward Integrator| forward integration]], starting decades ago with manufacturing and today spanning the value chain through to the end consumer. Luxottica's forward integration started in the 1970s when it added wholesale distribution to its manufacturing capabilities. Initially focused in Italy, this strategy expanded internationally in the 1980s. The shift allowed the company to leverage its manufacturing prowess more effectively and profitably through increased control of customer relationships. 

The company took the next logical step in 1995 when it acquired the business that owned LensCrafters, a leading North American optical retailer, becoming the first leading eyewear manufacturer to add retailing capabilities. Following the success of this strategic move, Luxottica hugely expanded its retail program across formats and markets, and it now owns GMO, OPSM, Pearle Vision (North America) and Sunglass Hut among others.

Luxxotica's forward integration increases profitability, since less value from design, manufacturing and brand ownership leaks away through the chain. It lets the company build brand awareness and dictate trends, significantly reducing the risk of a fashion "miss", since Luxottica is the arbiter of what is in vogue. Owning retail stores guarantees retail distribution, a benefit that expands to specifics such as shelf location, in-store marketing and knowledgeable sales reps. Owners of the licensed brands cite distribution capability as one of the main reasons that they are drawn to Luxottica. Retail ownership also affords better consumer insight than a manufacturer possesses, meaning better design decisions. 

The company's strength across the value chain positions it for dominance. Its platform facilitates superior acquisition synergies compared to rivals, regardless of deal type. For example, a newly acquired brand can be distributed through the world's most comprehensive network of more than 7'000 stores of its own and more than 150'000 other outlets in 130 countries (a benefit that also applies to newly licensed brands). After acquiring a retailer, Luxottica can immediately push an unparalleled product portfolio through the store base - true for physical chains as well as online merchandisers. This unmatched prowess means that stand-alone companies are worth vastly more once incorporated into the  Luxottica family. 

Forward integration into retail does not always confer such significant benefits on manufacturers. It tends to increase the fixed costs base, impairing needed flexibility for companies in volatile industries or with weak brands where demand fluctuates. But the eyewear industry is relatively stable and Luxottica combines sophisticated manufacturing and logistics with a powerful brands portfolio. Can you imagine a premium sunglasses shop *not* stocking Oakley or Ray-Ban?

Luxottica's unique position has led to strong, steady organic sales growth and sustainably high returns on capital, along with plentiful cash generation to fund continuing tuck-in acquisitions.
