# Mastercard - Data analytics and value-added services

by #InPractise 


Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Let’s jump right in; did you work in the services side of Mastercard with location-based stuff?

Yes, I was primarily in data analytics focused on the merchant side, as well as the transaction data, trying to figure out how to make exciting products with the data Mastercard gets, in an anonymous way. Mastercard has a tremendous amount of information and they do a privacy by design, but if you imagine the data warehouse and the transactions that come in, there are two views to that data. One is all the personal account numbers that come in. Mastercard doesn't have any personally identifiable information associated with those card numbers, but we do have the card numbers which identify the bank and type of product. We can anonymously look at a card number and figure out where they are shopping. On the other side of that, in the transaction, we have the actual merchant address and category, to help us understand which type of cards shop where. With those two views of the world, we come up with a tremendous amount of insight on how merchants perform and consumers behave.

### That section of Mastercard's business is opaque to investors because there are many different services and it is not all broken out by revenue or anything like that. For instance, I was reading about a recent Mastercard and McDonald's deal on dynamic yield, and honestly, it's not something we've ever spent a whole lot of time on. I am aware of dynamic yield but you cannot really track it in any way. Of course, we recognize that collectively these are all important services to the overall ecosystem. I'm curious if you could articulate the different groups of services or data analytics that are most important to the overall Mastercard business model? The company often talks about some of the more innovative or tech-forward things they're doing, but it's not always clear that those are the most critical elements, so could you articulate within this broader data and analytics or services business, what are the groups of activities that are most important for them to get right?

If you think about the data analytics side within Mastercard, you have a business which is servicing the stakeholders, within the Mastercard ecosystem. Obviously, you have the scheme of when we want to process the transaction and ensure the payment goes through, but as a net result of that, our stakeholders which include merchants, financial institutions and consumers, have access to additional products and services which come out of two data sets; where the consumer shopped and the type of consumers that are shopping at the merchant.

In the McDonald's deal, with that particular angle, it is about how to effectively target consumers to get them the right offer at the right time. Based on the transactions of a particular group, you're able to understand whether they are coming out of college, their kids just left, or are in the middle of a family life, just by looking at their purchases. When you start layering in additional information on spend, you can improve targeting. That benefits consumers but also merchants who can properly target a group of consumers to get them an offer, do a loyalty program, or a co-brand that could get rewards to consumers. This is all about targeting the right consumer and driving loyalty, while helping merchants build that loyalty base so that they can go out and generate additional spend.

### Starbucks know exactly who their customers are and which products are being purchased when, but with McDonald's, most people are not using a loyalty program or they're swiping a credit card. Because there's no PII or product-like purchase level, you don't know if they bought a hamburger and a shake or fries and chicken nuggets, which you would know in a true loyalty program. Is this more about targeting cohorts of customers and pulling in their data on where they spent? You might say this group of people that go to Burger King half the time and McDonald's half the time, let's target them in a different way from somebody who only eats McDonald's?

Mastercard has a much wider view than a particular merchant will have, and I don't know a lot about dynamic yields in terms of the what they're doing. From a basic standpoint, they are building consumer profiles for both online and offline activity, and when you layer those in, you supplement the existing information to improve the targeting and profiling accuracy. The way the modeling works is you might have an empty-nester flag, and based off a bunch of different parameters, they will model between 1 and 100 the likelihood of a card number being in that profile. From that point, you can build targeting lists that are much more effective than the standard households from Equifax.

### That's a good example of value-add services which Mastercard provides. What are the broader groups of key stuff they are able to provide?

It depends who the target audience is. If you're specifically talking about a bank, the bank has information with the consumer. They hold the consumer relationship, so there's acquisition and retention and this idea of revolvers and understanding people who pay off their bill one at a time. The banks will try to figure out effective marketing and how to increase their spend to their top of wallet, and the data and analytic services who offer those FIs will improve their targeting efforts and save them money in acquisition.

When we're talking about big merchants like [[Walmart]] and Target, they may want to understand the effect of a new store. If they put up a new store in an area, what is the particular spend in that area. They have the ability to understand if spend is growing or decreasing in a particular zip code. This gets down to a 100m grid where we can see spend, across the entire globe, in category. With the data Mastercard has, they can understand whether a restaurant is successful and, if they want to put a loyalty program in place, they can effectively target consumers and put out offers, then measure the effect of those using the data they have.

Spend data is one of many pieces of data that are out there that build a bigger picture, rather than reviews, which everybody puts out, but people shop with their wallet. I can go to the data and tell you that this place is popular with the locals and this place is popular with tourists, which you cannot get from any of the review sites.

### You talked about services for merchants and banks rather than consumers, which makes sense, but when you think about buy now pay later or cash apps, consumers prefer them for some reason. If you can get many people using cash apps then merchants will accept them, and the same thing with buy now pay later. What are the drivers for merchants to not only accept but promote buy now pay later or cash apps or off-rail transactions? Fees are self-evident but are there other reasons?

Merchants are trying to generate sales, and the different ways consumers can pay matters to them. If they see people abandoning their shopping cart because they don't offer the right way to pay, they may expand their payment options. Buy now pay later services are offered by a financial institution, which requires instant decisioning, and there are many instant decisioning SaaS systems out there which give you consumer information to make a credit decision on the spot. But with the data within the Mastercard walls, they can also make an API call to get the likelihood of whether the consumer will spend or not. It is not only the view of the credit agencies, but the actual credit card spend that is going on. Merchants will have to integrate with four different systems in order to get that crediting service. Mastercard can consolidate that information into a single place so you can make instant credit decisions. That is the advisor service offered with the buy now pay later component.

### The additional service Mastercard provides is around total spending; you will accept this person through this thing so do you want them as a customer longer term, as opposed to will they pay back the loan?

Correct, and it doesn't only apply to consumers because we issue business cards. This is also about whether or not a business has a good payment history. There are many rules and regulations in the credit industry and agencies around whether credit worthiness is there. Mastercard takes that very seriously, so whatever they're doing there will be regulated.

### It will be interesting to see what happens with regulation, it's common to get innovation and low interest rates but the regulation comes in afterwards.

The credit reporting agencies are strictly monitored and we're not able to provide an insight into credit worthiness; there's no credit decisionings there. But the data is used in collaboration with other data sources to make those decisionings.

### You mentioned shopping cart abandonment, I have a Mastercard as my primary card and when I'm shopping online, I either auto fill it using the password manager or I use PayPal because I've had an account for 20 years so it is simply inertia. I know there's Masterpass and I have thought it strange that credit cards’ own wallets haven't taken off, which I have understood because most people have multiple cards and you have Visa and Mastercard. Yet I only have one primary card, so I could use Masterpass; why isn't Masterpass more widely used?

Back in the day, when PayPal started inserting themselves into carts, there was a big concern about security on the internet as well as ease of use, so Mastercard came out with Masterpass. Mastercard is a very innovative company and they were trying to roll it out. It didn't get the traction as you would expect, nor did the American Express or Visa versions. That is probably due to trial and error; Mastercard throw hundreds of products out there when responding to the industry and some of them get traction and some of them don't. PayPass was this grand idea that consumers could tap their card or put a chip in their watch or phone and tap it against a terminal. Do you know what I'm talking about?

### Yes.

We had to first come up with a standard, then work with all the banks to convince them to put RFID chips in their cards, then work with merchants to replace all their terminals. We had to spend time, effort and capital to convince banks and merchants this would take off. Bank do not want to spend if there's no acceptance and merchants do not want to roll out terminals if there's no card issuance. You have to run through that to gain traction, and you saw PayPass and Blink from Chase and Visa came up, which became a branding nightmare because some terminals would accept and others would not. Apple was first to tokenize the card number in their phone and enable RFID, which is when branding started to take off. Today, that is Apple Pay and Google Pay, but it started as PayPass. That is an example of something which got traction but Masterpass didn't receive the traction required to get to market.

### Mastercard talks about security credentials and digital identity, not only the credentials in the card but the person's identity. If I think about using your face ID to authorize a payment, it seems that personal identification and payment credentials should merge longer term and become the eventual end state. How can Mastercard be an important player for authorizing payments and for other identification purposes?

Biometric data has been explored by Mastercard, Visa and others for some time. Before the finger print reader on the phone, we were talking about putting a reader in the card so that you could touch the card to activate the chip. There is a lot of exploration into this, but there is also the security element of biometric data. Storing the data behind the face ID, iris finger print and voice has been accomplished, but there are many loopholes and it has to be extremely effective. I know Mastercard doesn't want to associate consumer information with the card number; that is a walled-off area. Working with card issuers and mobile companies, they are coming up with ways to use biometrics within the transaction stream for both authentication and credit. Whether Mastercard will own the field, be a player or help define the parameters around it, they are heavily involved in it.

### Thinking about privacy issues, one of the potential benefits of the pure play buy now pay later players is that it is at the product rather than the basket level. That gives them product level SKU data across multiple merchants so if you forget about privacy rules, they have information that could let any merchant target people better. Suddenly, this is less about capturing the transaction and more about getting valuable data. You've mentioned how Mastercard and Visa do not have that information, but how will that play out because they would have to violate all sorts of privacy laws?

Mastercard is an enabler of transactions but their primary customer is financial institutions who issue cards, and they have relationships with consumers and merchants. These are supplemental products or different payment alternatives that the financial institutions are looking to get. Mastercard is there to support their customers but the financial institution or the merchants wants to enable new payment methods, such as a credit service for buy now pay later. They will offer their merchants this new system to integrate in their site, and it becomes an acquirer service.

### I understand who their customer is, but you've emphasized the way in which Mastercard does not do individual personal identifiable information and that one of the bull cases on buy now pay later pure plays is the way they can leverage personal identification, so they have a big advantage because Mastercard doesn't have the SKU level data and they don't have all this PII. There's a reason why they don't have SKU level data and PII, and as a society regulators and consumers don't want that to be available. In your opinion, will buy now pay later pure plays not leverage that bull case scenario because there's a reason merchants don't get access to SKU level data?

I'm looking at this from a Mastercard point of view, and what we were just talking about is how Mastercard separates personally identifiable information. City Bank, Chase and Bank of America are the ones who have relationships with consumers, so buy now pay later has a lot of traction because consumers are looking for this type of instant credit. All the data and insights coming in from consumers are handled by the banks. They agree to a credit check and the bank knows the card number associated with the consumer, so can do that mapping, and can call Mastercard to get all the detail behind the card number, to make a much better decision from the various sources. Mastercard will simply provide the card number and the details behind it and the bank will make the connection with the consumer credit worthiness by going to Equifax and others.

### When you think about their B2B strategy, what are the most important barriers they face to growing it dramatically over time and what do you think are the key reasons that investors should be optimistic that will play out?

Help me by defining B2B.

### Business to business payments, like a company who is paying their vendors.

There are a few challenges with that model but they are all solvable and I know Mastercard is spending a lot of time solving. Moving money between vendors is rather simple; you pull up a payee and payer and pay them. The idea of generating a catalog of all people you can pay is the challenging piece. As a company who has 40 different vendors, I want a catalog of all those vendors available, to be able to transfer money, but I also want to understand if any of my vendors have problems. Potentially, a vendor is trying to get your money and didn't fulfill, so ranking vendor risk is another element.

On the other hand, if you're a vendor looking at potential new customers to work with, having a catalog of people buying from you, and being able to risk and rate them to avoid pop up organizations who buy and don't pay, is another component. Those two pieces need to be built out completely. All the data is there, it is simply a matter of bringing it together into a nice user interface. Once you have that, it is simple a matter of moving money and scoring vendors and buyers. There is a lot of opportunity there and I know Mastercard has been moving in that direction.

### A simple account to account payment infrastructure, like the Fed is developing is not enough?

No, it's not enough because if you have to pay five vendors, you need them in a system to be able to track them, and a bunch of information around risk goes with that.

### Thank you for your time; I appreciate it.