# Mike Trigg - Defying the Fade at WCM

### Extract from the Capital Allocators Podcast, episode 162

See also [[Corporate Culture]],  [[Paul Black]] and [[Moat Typologies]]

**Ted Seides** : We have talked to Paul about those two key features of the investment process, but let's start with this question of moats, and widening moats. How do you think about assessing companies through that lens?


**Mike Trigg :** It's been a huge evolution. I think if you asked anybody, intuitively they'd say ok I get it, why wouldn't I want to own a business with a set of advantages or a moat that's strengthening. How do you detect that? How do you do that with any sort of consistency? We've done it in a bunch of different ways. 
The first thing we really started doing actually was case studies on companies. A lot of it is rooted in backward-looking analysis. It's funny because i think a lot of people are attracted to this industry for kind of the immediate gains, the cause-and-effect relationship that sort of affects things. Maybe that explains why people don't do more backward looking work. 

We started doing case studies on companies and great companies, tracing the full lifecycle of the business and trying to figure out "Ok, with this company's moat, what were the early signs that this moat was developing and being built, what did the market think about the company at the time, and then going all the way through what were the early warning signs that this moat started to peter out and then ultimately maybe it started shrinking?"  And so, we did that on a bunch of different companies, and the interesting thing was that we started to see patterns amongst companies. And sometimes those patterns were not just several companies in the same industry that had done really well that shared certain characteristics, but oftentimes they were companies that shared business model attributes that were in totally different industries.

From that we created a set of typologies or frameworks really rooted in this idea of pattern recognition. So we have a bunch of these things where we are looking at an outsourcing business model as an example. We think we have isolated the four things that are really consistent with long-term moat expansion for an outsourcing business model. And when we look at different companies, there are a lots of different outsourcers in different industries that pass these four criteria, then it gives us a lot of confidence that it's a business that will be able to sustain its growth and grow its returns for a really long period of time. More importantly it allows you to cancel out the noise that you're inundated with in the day-to-day news.

**Ted Seides :** In that example, the outsourcers, what are those four criteria? And what are some examples of where you saw that across different industries?

**Mike Trigg :** The first think we would look for is, we want a runway of outsourcing. We don't want to look at outsourcers when the majority of the market has already been outsourced. That can take a really long time, to be honest with you. These things are actually pretty slow-moving. And even in some of the other industries that we are involved in today, things like outsourced clinical trials, or outsourced pharma manufacturing, you're looking at well under fifty percent of these markets being outsourced.

And then the second piece is, you want the outsourced service to be a relatively small part of the customer's PnL, but the cost of failure to be really high. So if it's a really high piece of the expense line, often times you don't get the pricing, it becomes a little bit more contentious, so you want more of a cosier relationship and it's easier to achieve that when the actual service cost is relatively small.

The other one is a fragmented customer base. That too is pretty apparent. You don't want an outsourcer relying on two big customers. That could be also something that will not lead to the kind of durability that we are interested in. So you want some level of customers fragmentation.

And last one, and this is probably the most important one, you want evidence that the outsourcer is continuously moving up the value chain. That's ultimately what is going to really extend the growing curve of the business. That's a fairly qualitative assessment, but if you go back and you study what the great outsourcers have done over time, they started doing pretty basic things. And then over time they became a lot more essential. Their role in the ecosystem just became a lot bigger, and a lot of that is just by effectively being like an outsourced R&D arm for those companies.

Taiwan Semiconductors is the outsourcer that we've owned the longest, that's a playbook that has been pretty successful. For many years we've owned a company that's called Chr. Hansen. They make cultures and enzymes for yoghurt, milk and cheese. So they serve the dairy industry predominantly. And Nestlé, Danone, companies like that used to largely produce all those cultures and enzymes in house, and over time they became big branding and distribution businesses. And they realized that they could outsource some of the capital intensive activities in the business to companies like Hansen. And when the company just went public, the narrative was not too different from what you saw in the semiconductors twenty years ago, which is: "Why would you want to own an outsourced culture and bacteria company? Wouldn't you want to own brands, wouldn't you want to own distribution?" 

These are the companies that are going to play to the emerging middle-class consumer, there is really nothing of all that unique. But if you dug into it, you would have realized that in the same way, they were leveling up the value chain. Companies like Danone wanted to make some feature claims about their products like either being sugar-free, or being able to be stored at certain temperatures. A lot ended up being about health and wellness. All that stuff ends up being enabled at the supplier level. They were becoming an increasingly important partner to those customers. And that over time manifests itself not just in great growth opportunities, but also opportunities for more margins. And so, when we looked at the company initially, its margins were around 20 percent when it first went public. We did not look at it as an ingredient supplier, like most people were doing. We were looking at it as an outsourced business. And if you look at other outsourcers that we had studied, for us it was clear that it could be a 30-35 percent operating margin business. That turned out to be the case and eventually much more. 

That's the sort of pattern recognition that we do, and I think it's kind of enabled in part by the fact that we're not just a bunch of specialists, we're generalists. We look all over the world. We can kind of see these patterns that we wouldn't be able to if we were stuck all in covering certain countries or certain industries. 

**Ted Seides :** With the outsourcers there is this typology, you have figured out these four key criteria to figure out what's happening with the moat. What are the other ways that you use to measure these widening moats across different typologies of industries?

**Mike Trigg :** One thing that we realized eventually with the [[case study]] approach was that there is some selection bias that comes with that. If I say intuitively that most outsourcers turned out to be great businesses, ok i can give you a list of ten that we should go study, but I never knew about the ones that tried and failed, right? Certainly you can study the lifecycle of the moat and figure out what were the signs of deterioration of the moat, but it's hard to know what the failed examples were. And so we've done this in a more quantitative way, by taking an industry and all the participants in the industry. And then study what's happened to them over the course of a few decades. 

As an example, luxury goods. If you are a global investor, odds are you've spent a lot of time looking at luxury goods stocks over the years. And we studied around fifty different luxury companies over the course of thirty years, so we could find what were the markings of the ones that were really able to compound returns at really high rates for a long period of time. Not the ones that had their day in the sun, but really the ones that were really lasting and enduring. What were the coffee can investments of that group. 

When we did that, it was really clear that there were two criteria. One was the higher the price point the better. So the more aspirational the brand, the more enduring it tends to be. And then the other one is controlling your own distribution. Not relying on wholesale channels. That in itself explains why the companies we've been involved in the past, things like Louis Vuitton, Hermes, Ferrari, they all sort of fit that criteria. In the same time we've been reluctant to invest in stocks like Kering Group, which owns Gucci, not that they haven't done extremely well in the recent years, because they have, but it does not really fit that framework that I'm talking about, and often times we think that, of all the things, the frameworks or the typologies, all the things we do is to help you make distinctions between what's momentum and what is really structural differences in companies that are going to lead to long-lasting above average growth. It doesn't mean we're always right. But more often than not, they are going to be really helpful in that regard. 

So that, along with the filtering piece, to kind of tune out all the noise, are among the most important things that they do. 


The other really important part about moat trajectory, and to be honest we talk about this all the time internally. It's a mindset, right? It steers a lot of the questions that we ask, companies. 
As good as it is for finding great companies ideas, I think actually it is probably more valuable to steer you away from bad ideas. 

So much of successful investing is that you are going to make mistakes, so you should minimize their frequency and then the damage when they take place. I think this is an under-appreciated advantage of this mindset. Especially with growth investing. Maybe that's partly why growth investing has a bad name. 

Another way to think about moat trajectory is that there is the moat, and then there is the growth formula. And those two things combined give you a positive growth trajectory. Depending on the type of business that you are looking at, for some you have to be more sensible to the moat, and then for others you have to be more sensitive to the growth piece. So if you are looking at a consumer staples company, take Pernod Ricard. Their moat is pretty well understood, it's not going to change. It is brands, it is distribution. But what is going to dictate whether it is going to be a good investment or not is their ability to execute on growth. But if you contrast that with something like Shopify, which is another name that we own, the growth piece of the Shopify thesis is pretty well-known. Everyone who is looking pretty quickly can see that Shopify is growing really fast. They have a huge TAM, and they have probably seven percent of their total addressable market in terms of merchants and they have a massively growing ecosystem. What is going to drive this investment is going to be disruption, it is going to be the moat, it is going to be competition. So there are different sensitivities that we kind of focus on. Those are all designed to, once we own the name, obviously to make sure that we don't end up owning, in the case of the Pernods, a bunch of dead money high quality stock, and in the case of Shopify, businesses that are going to wake up one day and realize that there is a significant change to the competitive landscape, and find that there has been a very significant impairment to the valuation of the business. 

**Ted Seides :** How do you think about valuation of one of those companies? When one or the other aspect of what is creating growth or the moat is well-known, often the market prices that in. For some of the names you mentioned, by traditional valuation measures they look pretty expensive. 

**Mike Trigg:** I've gone through a full life of learnings when it comes to valuation. My first lesson in investing coming out of 2000 was the importance of valuation. Then I gravitated towards discounted cash flow models. Cause there is something so seductive about that. Especially when you're young and very impressionable. I remember the first time I did a discounted cash flow model and I put in what I thought were reasonable estimates for growth, margins and capital expenditures. And I looked at what the price was and I thought "Oh my goodness, I'm actually pretty close to the current stock price! I might actually be decent at this." False precision that I think can become pretty seductive. But over the years, for one, i learned that it is just ridiculous to think that you can precisely determine what a company is worth. Things are changing constantly. And particularly if you are investing in companies that are in growing industries with moats that are growing and cultures that are super adaptable, they will find their ways to grow. Your valuation work is going to look so wrong in a very short period of time. It is not really worth all the effort and the problems that come from this kind of cash flow models.

Not to mention the fact that focusing a lot on DCFs, there is false precision, it gets you very focused on the short term, while in reality most of the value in the discounted cash flow model resides in the terminal value, which you spend zero time actually thinking about. And if you are a long-term investor, that makes no sense. That's why we came up with the term "Defying the fade". One of the big mistakes that investors make when they do modelling is you look at a company, and you are very focused on the short term, and the company is growing five to six percent today, and you say "ok, i like the business, things are going well, that seems pretty good, that's close to the company's guidance. Maybe they'll do that again for next year, but after that it's probably gonna be five percent, and then it's gonna have to be down to four, and then before we know it's down to GDP and the same is true for your return on capital assumptions for this kind of cash flow model." 

And so, what really moat trajectory and culture are trying to do is identifying those companies that can defy the fade. We're not saying it will never take place, but by focusing on those companies with these attributes, they are going to maintain that competitive advantage period far longer than anybody thinks, and that gap between what the market thinks the competitive advantage expectations are and what actually happens is where all the alpha generation takes place. 

And we've just come to a place where focusing on the qualitative assessment of a business - that is, moat and culture -  and how that translates into the durability of a company's growth rate, I think that is far more predictive of the success of an investment rather than trying to find things like price breaks on businesses of reasonable quality, there is some sort of short term impact, and it's dropped the stock price, and you jump in at a 20 percent discount, close that gap, earn a little bit on cost of capital on top of that and then you're out of the business in a few years. A much more successful way to invest is the way we do it now. 

**Ted Seides :** So you touched a little bit on this notion of culture and culture being aligned with this competitive advantage for a growing moat trajectory. Paul also talks about that and you mentioned it a couple of times. What does it actually mean to do an analysis on a company's culture alignment with its competitive advantage?

**Mike Trigg :** So there is a huge evolution here. So when I ended up at  WCM, Paul and Kurt were already talking about culture. They had experienced a huge transformation in their own lives and Paul talked about it in your conversation. And he became convinced that if culture mattered for our company, it should matter for the companies we invest in. 
But the truth of the matter is, at the time, there was a pretty narrow view of what a great culture actually meant. At the time what Paul would tell you is "basically we're just trying to find a bunch of companies that sort of smell and taste like WCM. They talk about the same things that i am talking about. I would really like to go to work to that company too if I was in that industry. That means that must be a company with a great culture." 

And over time we realized that this is a very flawed way to look at things. Number one, there is no perfect culture. And particularly, what culture work in one industry might not be right in another. The joke that we have used for years is that google is infamous for unstructured time, and they give time to developers to go to work on pet projects and great things and that's a huge part of their culture. Canadian Pacific, which is a railroad that we've owned for a long time, it's a operation-driven company, it's all about sweating its assets and operational excellence and efficiency. Certainly if they decided to give everybody in the company unstructured time, there is going to be a serious problem in terms of how it is impacting its competitive advantage. At the same time, if you apply some of the things that Canadian Pacific does from a cultural perspective to the developers at Google, it's not going to give really great results. 

So there is no one perfect culture. You have to start from there. You have to make sure that your own personal biases on what is and is not a great culture are getting away. The ultimate question is, let's try to understand what the company's strategy is to grow their moat. Every company has a kind of strategy to differentiate itself from its competition, to grow its business, to take market share. Whatever their strategy for shareholder value is, let's try to understand what that is. A lot of that comes true in the moat trajectory analysis, and then once we think we understand that, then we want to talk to the company about what the behaviors are that they think are necessary to achieve that strategy.

**Ted Seides :** So what are the parts of your research when you are going in a company and get this information out?

**Mike Trigg :** What we have done over time is develop a bunch of questions that we think are really helpful for teasing those things out. There was a period of time, not that long ago, five or six years ago, when unfortunately we'd sit down with companies and we'd just say "Hey, could you do us a favor and describe your culture for a little while?"
Most companies can't do that, interestingly enough, particularly if you are reserving the last twenty minutes of an hour and a half meeting to ask them that question. 

And what really hit home with me, a number of years ago, we were going to visit Tencent. Tencent has a fantastic culture. We've done extensive research into it, but we've  never had the opportunity to have a dedicated culture meeting with them. And so, we were talking to one of the senior executives there, and I started off with that stupid question to describe their company's culture. And he gave me just an horrific answer, to be honest with you. He started talking about having to pay programmers more money because of competition from Alibaba. That's why I pivoted the conversation and asked them about a decision they made about closing their search business, which they had spent a bunch of money on. This is when they were trying to build a competing product with Baidu.

And he said, "Oh that was a really easy decision, our product manager came to us and told us we should shut the business down." And I thought, well that's pretty impressive that they felt comfortable enough to do that. He said "actually it was very easy for him. We compensate people based on user satisfaction, not on revenue growth."

And that's really the core of what Tencent's culture is all about, an obsessive focus on the user. That was an epiphany moment for me that we were not asking great questions. And so we set on a journey to figure out how to have good conversations with companies about their culture. And we just talked to lot of folks, and built some relationships with people that had spent a lot of time on this in the academic community, and ultimately we came up with a series of questions.
Questions about one, about alignment. Cause this is a big piece of it. And then two, about adaptability. That's the other big hallmark of a great culture, it is one that is adaptable. And so there are things that we look for in adaptable cultures and we ask questions about that.

As an example, if we are trying to figure out alignment, the first question would be: "**Let's hypothetically say that the son or daughter of a good friend of yours is going to work at the company. He starts next week and you'll have a coffee with him this afternoon. What are the three pieces of advice you are going to give him to be successful in the company?**" That's a much easier question for a CEO to answer than just saying "Hey, tell me about your culture, tell me what it is all about." You have to prime them in a kind of a place that will help him to give you the information that you want.
And then for things like adaptability, ultimately, you are looking for a learning orientation. What does that require? Lots of candor, learning from mistakes, extreme awareness... And so you can ask companies a pretty simple question. "What's a mistake that you've made, that you look back on now and you think wow I am so glad we've made that mistake because we're so much smarter because of it."

And when you'll ask it you'll be surprised. Sometimes you'll get really good answers, but often times you don't. For instance you'll ask that question and somebody will talk about some $10 million acquisition they've made three years ago where they've misjudged the people and they had to write it off. And I'm like "seriously, you are a $50 billion company, give me like a real mistake."
That would be maybe a yellow flag, that maybe they're not as adaptable as I thought. 

So we do that with management, we do that with former employees, and then, really the next foray for us, and the thing we are spending a lot of time on now, is more data-oriented culture work. And I think it is going to become a source of meaningful differentiation. Some of it being enabled by a lot of the work being done in the ESG landscape, and I think this is going to be the next big push for us. 

**Ted Seides :** As you've come through this incredible trajectory of the firm, even in the last three years we've known each other, how do you turn that lens to WCM? How do you think about what's happening with WCM's moat, and what's happening with WCM's culture?

**Mike Trigg :** All of the view of nurturing and keeping the culture as healthy as possible is the single most important thing we can do. Obviously things are going to change, they change with size. We spend a lot of time trying to articulate where we come from, the behaviors that we think are essentials to get us from where we are to where we want to go. Honestly I worry when there are people that have come in, and all they know is a firm that has experienced a tremendous amount of success and prosperity, and they don't have a breadth of experience to look at. They might miss some core attributes that I think have made this company successful. 

And I worry that they stop trying to make the firm better. We talk about the core values of the firm, which are fun and gratitude, and Paul went into those in your conversation. In the research team, we have our own core values as well. And they are think different, and get better. And in some ways the firm embodies those as well, but the research team went through some process of establishing core values. And it was a really similar process to what the leadership team did when they came up with fun and gratitude. A lot of it is just looking back and say, Ok how did we end up here, and what makes us different from everybody else?

It's not talking about smart people or hard work, it is about what are the behaviors that made us successful. And as we went through this, think different and get better just bubbled up to the surface. And if you step back, it actually makes perfect sense. If you study the industry, one of my other partners Sanjay Ayer has made a really good job articulating this, it is really difficult to detect and know whether somebody is talented or not. Some of that is because of really long feedback loops in the industry, it can take ten years or longer to know if someone is a really great investor. There is a lot of noise, there is a lot of luck involved. Because of that, these rules emerge in the industry. They are unwritten rules. Everybody starts to act the same way, they dress the same way. If you go to an investment conference by one of the big banks, it is a little bit sad almost, the uniformity there is in those rooms. 

And people tend to look at the same schools for hiring, everybody watches and read the same thing. I think those are really counterproductive behaviors that largely explains why a lot of active management struggle. And it's a lot of groupthink, people are worried about standing out from the crowd, they are worried about careers, so they play it safe, they hug the benchmark, they focus on a lot of short-term information, they become information-gatherers principally, not trying to stick their neck out on really unique insight. And they have a fixed mindset. They perpetuate that myth that there are some people that have this it factor in this industry, and some that don't. And they want you to think that they're smarter than everybody else. Even if everybody in this industry is already pretty damn smart. 

Think different and get better is kind of the antidote to that. If being part of groupthink is part of the problem, let's totally flip it on its head and let's have a proud culture about being different. Let's run really concentrated portfolios, let's focus on things where there is really compounding knowledge, like moat trajectory and culture, where we can actually get better at assessing those things over time. Let's not focus on developing insights that are going to be worthless in six months. Let's pound this idea of being kind of irreverent and scrappy and different from everybody else. And then let's really make the firm about this journey of getting better. 

What does that take? It takes a lot of candor, it takes a lot of trust, you gotta  be willing to talk about your mistakes, and you gotta lean into them. And that's not only an opportunity for you to learn, but for the whole company to learn, to say hey we're not perfect, we've made mistakes. But what I think we've always done is learn from them. And that's been core to the success of the firm. And when new people come in and I think the culture is going to change, I am actually pretty confident that if people can just continue to think different and get better, the firm is going to be in really good hands. 

**Ted Seides :** Mike, I am curious as you have grown, when you think about the business, so much incredible growth has come from one product. How do you think about just getting better and better at doing that one thing in mostly international growth, compared to taking the skill set and broadening it out in other investment strategies?

**Mike Trigg :** Yes, i think this is going to become a huge part of our story within the next ten years. It's interesting because I think growth is kind of a dirty word in investing, and I look at it slightly differently and say growth is such a huge part of our story and what makes us a fun place to work. So we need to find other avenues for growth. We've done that out of the global equity's team. By going out of global, emerging markets, international small caps, global long/short, we have a China fund now, there are a lot of interesting things that we are doing. And i think in these asset classes we are exploiting some massive inefficiencies.

But then also, what is really exciting is trying to make it a platform for other people. I look at it and I say we are the luckiest guys in the world to be sitting where we are, and what better thing to do than give other people an opportunity to do what we've done. We started doing this a couple of years ago, we brought a team in, now it does small cap value that's based in Cincinnati. We have a team in St Louis that does small cap growth and I hope we continue to do those. Our intention is to continue to find people that are passionate about what they do, they have good ideas, maybe they've been stuck in a bank or an insurance company, or they've been in a firm and something went sideways, and they didn't really have the resources to really make it work. And we have the resources and the platform that they can come in, plug into, and really having the freedom to chase whatever it is they are most passionate about. And I think that is definitely something that, at the firm level we'll continue to pursue. There is just a lot of opportunities that we can give to people.











