
From a perspective of attractiveness, being an unregulated monopoly is arguably the highest level of existence in the corporate world. If achieve, profits and returns are maximally strong. It is easy to think about big market structures when talking monopolies, like Microsoft in operating systems in the late 20th century or Standard Oil in energy in the late 19th century. Real monopolies tend to be sizable, rare, and disliked by governments. Focusing exclusively on monopolies would leave a small portfolio - along with considerable regulatory risk under a variety of antitrust laws worldwide.

Instead, when thinking about monopolies, one should think in terms of what can be called *mini monopolies*. Mini-monopolies are about the real choices customers have at the time of decision rather than theoretical choices. They usually arise from a product offering highly-valued customer benefits unavailable from rival goods. That they exist more in customers' minds than in economic models means they are sometimes less obvious, but their financial characteristics can be compelling. 

Take tobacco, which exhibits mini-monopolistic characteristics. Few people would argue that the tobacco industry us a monopoly: it may be concentrated, but competition prevails. For the individual nicotine addict, however, a favored brand occupies a unique position. A smoker always sticks to the first brand they smoked and, if a store doesn't carry this brand, will most likely go elsewhere than choose an alternative brand, even at a much lower price. The main competition the tobacco industry faces is in making the product attractive for new users. The extreme value of these mini-monopolies is one of the reasons why tobacco companies continue to make a lot of money despite extensive government restrictions worldwide. 

There are many other examples of mini-monopolies but few are as extreme as tobacco. If a piece of equipment needs repair, the manufacturer often has monopoly on spare parts. That is why they are expensive.  Software upgrades and maintenance contracts usually sell at a high price compared to the cost of production.

When a company make products that yield unique customer benefits, it creates some sort of mini-monopoly. The degree is a function of customer loyalty - profound in the case of the hooked smoker and of varying intensity elsewhere. A company's degree of monopoly power also varies between existing customers, where loyalty is a historical legacy, and attracting new ones, which requires considerably greater ongoing investment.

Finally, any given company may enjoy mini-monopoly power in some of its product lines but not in others. These groups deserve further analysis as they may contain some underappreciated gems.