# Munger's Approach to Business Analysis and Assessment
## Highlights:

**"Quickly eliminate the big universe of what not to do, follow up in a fluent multidisciplinary attack on what remains, then act decisively when, and only when, the right circumstances appear."**


> You must know the big ideas in the big disciplines and use them routinely - all of them, not just a few. Most people are trained in one model - economics, for example - and try to solve all problems in one way. You know the old saying: "To the man with a hammer, the world looks like a nail." This is a dumb way of handling problems.

Charlie's approach to investing is quite different from the more rudimentary systems used by most investors. Instead of making a superficial stand-alone assessment of a company's financial information, Charlie conducts a comprehensive analysis of both the internal workings of the investment candidate as well as the larger, integrated [[Business as an Ecosystem |ecosystem]] in which it operates. He calls the tools he uses to conduct this review "Multiple [[Mental Models]]". These models serve a framework for gathering , processing, and acting on information. They borrow from and neatly stitch together the analytical tools, methods, and formulas from such traditional disciplines as history, psychology, physiology, mathematics, engineering, biology, physics, chemistry, statistics, economics, and so on. The unassailable logic of Charlie's ecosystem approach to investment analysis: *Just as multiple factors shape almost every system, multiple models from a variety of disciplines, applied with fluency, are needed to understand that system.*

As John Muir observed about the interconnectedness of nature, "When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe."

Charlie seeks to discover the universe hitched to each of his investment candidates by gaining a firm grasp on all, or at least most, of the relevant factors comprising both its internal and external environment. When properly collected and organized, his Multiple Mental Models (about one hundred in number, he estimates) provide a "latticework" that leads to remarkable insights as to the purpose and nature of life. More pertinent to our purpose here, his models supply the analytical structure that enables him to reduce the inherent chaos and confusion of a complex investment problem into a clarified set of fundamentals. Especially important examples of these models include the redundancy/back-up system model from engineering, the [[compound interest]] model from mathematics, the break-point/tipping point moment/autocatalysis model from physics and chemistry, the modern Darwinian synthesis model from biology, and cognitive misjudgment models from psychology.

The net result of this broad-spectrum analysis is a heightened understanding for how the  many factors affecting an investment candidate blend and link to one another. Sometimes this understanding reveals the existence of second order, ripple, or spillover effects. Other times the factors employed combine to create enormous [[Lollapalooza Effect]], good or bad. 
By applying this framework, Charlie lives in a different world from most investors when it comes to investment analysis. His approach accepts the reality that investment problems are inherently complex, and in a manner more in keeping with the rigors of scientific inquiry than conventional "investing", he attacks them with a staggering degree of preparation and broad-based research.

Charlie's "Big Ideas from the Big Disciplines" approach to investment evaluation is certainly unique in the business world - as is its origin. Not finding any existing approach adequate to the task, Charlie painstakingly created his own largely self-taught system. The "self-taught" statement is no exaggeration; he once said "To this day, I have never taken any course, anywhere, in chemistry, economics, psychology, or business". And yet these disciplines - especially psychology - form the foundation upon which his system is built.

It is this signature approach, backed by Charlie's formidable intellect, temperament, and decades of relevant experience, that have made him the virtuoso of business pattern recognition so valued by Buffett. Like a chess grandmaster, through logic, instinct, and intuition, he determines the most promising investment "moves", all the while projecting the illusion that the insight came easily, even simply. But make no mistake: This "simplicity" comes only at the end of a long journey toward understanding - not at the beginning. His clarity is hard-won: the product of a lifetime of studying patterns of human behavior, business systems, and a myriad of other scientific disciplines. 

Charlie counts preparation, patience, discipline, and objectivity among his most fundamental guiding principles. He will not deviate from these principles, regardless of group dynamics, emotional itches, or popular wisdom that "this time around it's different". When faithfully adhered to, these traits result in one of the best-known Munger characteristics: *not buying or selling very often*. Munger, like Buffett, believes a successful investment career boils down to only a handful of decisions. So when Charlie likes a business, he makes a very large bet and typically holds the position for a long period. Charlie calls it "sit on your ass investing" and cites its benefits : "You're paying less to brokers, you're listening to less nonsense, and if it works, the tax system gives you an extra one, two, or three percentage points per annum". In his view, a portfolio of three companies is plenty of diversification. Accordingly, Charlie is willing to commit uncommonly large percentage of his investment capital to individual "focused" opportunities. Find a Wall Street  organization, financial advisor, or mutual fund manager willing to make that statement!

Given Charlie's record of success, not to mention Buffett's endorsement, why aren't his investment practices more routinely emulated by others? Perhaps the answer is that, for most people, Charlie's multidisciplinary approach is simply too hard. Further, few investors share Charlie's willingness to appear foolish by not following the herd. Religious in his objectivity, Charlie is content to swim imperturbably against the tide of popular opinion - indefinitely, if needed - which is a rare attribute in the average investor. And while this behavior can at times simply appear stubborn or contrarian, that is not the defining characteristic. Charlie is simply content to trust his own judgment  even when it runs counter to the wisdom of the herd. This "lone-wolf" aspect of Charlie's temperament is a rarely appreciated reason why he consistently outperforms the larger investment community. Indeed, if temperament chiefly arises from inborn tendencies, it may be that hard work, intellect, and experience, regardless of their intensity, are by themselves insufficient to make a great investor like Charlie Munger. The right kind of genetically predetermined "wiring" is needed as well.


At the 2004 [[Berkshire Hathaway]] annual meeting, a young shareholder asked Buffett how to succeed in life. After Buffett shared his thoughts, Charlie chimed in: "Don't do cocaine. Don't race trains. And avoid AIDS situations." Many would dismiss his seemingly flippant answer as merely humorous (which it certainly was), but in fact it faithfully reflects both his general views on avoiding trouble in life and his particular method for avoiding missteps in investing.

Often, as in this case, Charlie generally focuses first on what to avoid - that is, on what NOT to do - before he considers the affirmative steps he will take in a given situation. "*All I want to know is where I'm going to die, so I'll never go there*" is one of his favorite quips. (See [[Inversion]]). In business as in life, Charlie gains enormous advantage by summarily eliminating the unpromising portions of "the chess board", freeing his time and attention for the more productive regions. Charlie strives to reduce complex situations to their most basic, unemotional fundamentals. Yet, within this pursuit of rationality and simplicity, he is careful to avoid what he calls "Physics envy", the common human craving to reduce enormously complex systems (such as those in economics) to one-size-fits-all Newtonian formulas. Instead, he faithfully honors Albert Einstein admonition, "A scientific theory should be as simple as possible, but not simpler." Or in his own words, "What I'm against is being very confident and feeling that you know, for sure, that your particular action will do more good than harm. You're dealing with highly complex systems wherein everything is interacting with everything else."

Another Benjamin - Graham, not Franklin - played a significant role in forming Charlie's investing outlook. One of the most enduring concepts of Graham's *The Intelligent Investor* is Mr. Market. Usually, Mr Market is a temperate and reasonable fellow, but some days he is gripped by irrational fear or greed. Graham cautioned the investor to carefully use his own, unemotional judgment of value instead of relying on the often manic-depressive behavior of the financial markets. Similarly, Charlie recognizes that even among the most competent and motivated of people, decisions are not always mad on a purely rational basis. For this reason, he considers the psychological factors of human misjudgment some of the most important mental models that can be applied to an investment opportunity.


> Personally, I've gotten so that I now use a kind of two-track analysis. First, what are the factors that really govern the interests involved, rationally considered? And second, what are the subconscious influences where the brain at a subconscious level is automatically forming conclusions in various ways - which, by and large, are useful - but which often malfunction? One approach is rationality -the way you'd work out a bridge problem, by evaluating the real interest, the real probabilities, and so forth. And the other is to evaluate the psychological factors that cause subconscious conclusions - many of which are wrong.


Obviously, the methods described to this point can't be learned in a university classroom or on Wall Street. They were developed by Charlie, from scratch, to satisfy his own exacting requirements. 

**"Quickly eliminate the big universe of what not to do, follow up in a fluent multidisciplinary attack on what remains, then act decisively when, and only when, the right circumstances appear."**

Is it worth the effort to develop and adhere to such an approach? Charlie seems to think so: "It's kind of fun to sit there and out-think people who are way smarter than you are because you've trained yourself to be more objective and more multidisciplinary. Furthermore, there is a lot of money in it, as I can testify from my own personal experience."

