# Munger on Cicero

[...] But I later came to share Cicero's governmental views. What he recommended was a combination of aspects of limited-franchise democracy, oligarchy and temporary kingship formed into an elaborate system of checks and balances designed to prevent any one politician from causing unendurable damage. 

My comment: how is it different from Singapore?

His underlying philosophical view was one of deep and realistic cynicism about human nature, including a distaste for pure mob rule and demagogues. This cynicism was of course counter-balanced by his belief that it was the duty of the citizenry, particularly its most eminent members, to serve the State and its values wisely and vigorously, even if that required a great sacrifice on the part of the servers. All ages have found that the duty part of this prescription is a hard sell. Indeed, Cicero in his own time found it necessary to invent the Latin word "moralis", root or our  word moral, to help flog his fellow Romans in the right direction.

Cicero, learned man that he was, believed in self-improvement so long as breath lasts. He commends Socrates for learning to play the fiddle late in life and another Roman for mastering Greek when old. Indeed, according to Cicero, the deaths of others that hurt the most are the ones of people you are learning from. And so at one point he has Cato say of Quintus  Fabius Maximus "I was so found of him speak that I feared that when he was taken from us, I should never find another such man to improve by." And Cicero twice quotes with relish what was often said of Solon, the great man of early Athens: **"Daily learning something, he grew old."**

The most celebrated passage in *de Senectute* is probably the following grand summary: 
> The best armor of Old Age is a well spent life preceding it;  a Life employed in the Pursuit of useful Knowledge, in honorable Actions and the practice of Virtue; in which he who labors to improve himself from his Youth, will in Age reap the happiest fruits of them; not only because these never leave a Man, not even in the extremest Old Age; but because a Conscience bearing Witness that our Life was well-spent, together with the Remembrance of past good Actions, yields an unspeakable Comfort to the Soul.