> How might corporate success be predictable? There are some clues in the world around us. Zak and I observe several business models that work in the long run, and scale economics shared is one of these, witness Ryanair, Wal-Mart, Geico, Southeast Airlines, Tesco, Nebraska Furniture Mart, Direct Line et al. And that is why companies that share scale with the customer such as Carpetright, Costco, Berkshire Hathaway, Amazon and AirAsia make up around sixty percent of the Partnership. ** It works because it turns size, normally an anchor to growth and returns, into an asset** . But I also don’t think this is a great secret.

Investors see the information (on conference calls they cheer “great quarter, Wal- Mart”) but, in our opinion, they incorrectly weigh the information. It could be argued that lots of things had to go right for Wal-Mart to grow for forty years. That is certainly true but, at its heart, a very few simple things really mattered. In our opinion, the central engine of success at Wal-Mart was a thrift orientation fueling growth with the savings shared with the customer. The culture of the firm celebrated this orientation and reinforced the good behavior. This is the deep reality of the business. This should have had the greatest weighting in the minds of long-term investors even if other things looked more important at the time. Instead investors may place too much emphasis on valuation heuristics, or margin trends, or incremental growth rates in revenues or any of the list above, but these items are transitory and anecdotal in nature.

**There are very few business models where growth begets growth. Scale economics turns size into an asset.** Companies that follow this path are at a huge advantage compared to those, for example, that suffer from Barbie syndrome. Put simply: average companies do not do scale economics shared. Average companies do not have a healthy culture. After all, average companies are more like GM than Wal-Mart! The removal of a portion of failure risk from the investment equation creates a huge opportunity for those investors that can see the company in its true perspective and act with a bit of patience. It is a huge anomaly that investors recognize success incrementally when the factors that lead to success, such as scale economics shared reinforced by a strong culture, may be constant. If the early investors in Wal-Mart had understood this, they may have retained their holding along with the, now billionaire, Walton family.


### Incentives of Scale Economics Shared
Scale economics shared operations are quite different. As the firm grows in size, scale savings are given back to the customer in the form of lower prices. The customer then reciprocates by purchasing more goods, which provides greater scale for the retailer who passes on the new savings as well. Yippee. This is why firms such as Costco enjoy sales per foot of retailing space four times greater than run-of-the-mill supermarkets. Scale economics shared incentivises customer reciprocation, and customer reciprocation is a super-factor in business performance.

Scale economics shared works across industries too with the effect that load factors at the low price Malaysian airline, AirAsia, are superior to high-low flag carrying airlines. And it works online: Amazon have deployed it so well that Amazon’s operating costs (per dollar of sales) plus its operating margin are less than some of its high street peers’ costs (per dollar of sales). This offers the prospect that, in theory, Amazon’s high street peers could price their products at net income breakeven and still not undercut Amazon’s prices or profitability. For these high street competitors the game is over. They will leak revenues to more efficient rivals as customers respond to the incentive of consistently low prices and convenience. Over time high street rivals, and less successful online rivals, will need to restructure, change their product, or go out of business. We estimate Amazon’s immediate hinterland of high street rivals have combined revenues of U$150bn in the US alone. If these firms go away over the next ten years, as Circuit City, Woolworths, Zavvi and others have recently, and Amazon picks up one dollar in ten of their sales, then this alone would be enough to quadruple Amazon’s US revenues over the next decade.


Scale economics works well in bad economic times as well as good. On the busiest day in the run up to Christmas this year, order volumes at Amazon were 16% higher than the previous year, and note this compares to industry-wide US retail sales which declined nearly ten percent in December, according to the commerce department! And at AirAsia revenues per seat per kilometre flown rose 33%, whilst costs per seat per kilometre flown excluding fuel declined 10% in the latest quarterly period. Our businesses are surging ahead, even if, in some cases, their share prices are half what they were twelve months ago. In the last few months Amazon has been priced in the market as if it would not grow in the future, despite some of the best growth prospects we can imagine. That is a very rare combination and, combined with other similarly cheap stocks in the partnership, was the basis for Nomad’s reopening at the end of last year.




See [[Scale Economics Shared]]