# Nick Sleep on Partnership Growth

At the time of writing the Partnership is nearly five times than at inception, with the smallest contribution having come from investment performance! The balance is due to subscriptions made by new and existing investors. These contributions have been welcome, from the point of view of making Nomad a viable commercial activity, but it has only been appropriate to accept subscriptions as we have been able to put incremental capital to good use. 

It is only fair to report that due to a quirk in your manager's character, growth in assets from this source drives him mad. The reason is the dilutive effect it has on overall performance.

Take, for example, our investment in Resorts World, a Malaysian casino. At the time of purchase the holding was 5% of assets and yet despite the shares doubling in the last two years the holding today is smaller as a proportion of the Partnership than two years ago. Likewise, Kersaf and Television Broadcast, whilst Stagecoach would have peaked at around 25% of fund assets but peaked at 15% due to dilution. So, what's to be done?

There are three alternatives:

1. Accept subscriptions as they come and place cash on deposit until suitable investments can be found. The problem here is that money can easily arrive faster than good investments, almost inevitably so, with dilutive consequences for existing investors, and suboptimal outcomes for new investors.
2. Accept subscriptions as they come and buy a little of everything to replicate the existing portfolio. This sounds attractive as, dealing costs and liquidity constraints aside, prospective returns from the Partnership as a whole are broadly maintained. But it does have one major, subtle drawback. There are very few absolutes in investing, but one thing about which we can be certain is that as prices rise prospective returns go down. If a business is worth $40, the purchase of shares at $30 has to be inferior to their purchase at $20.  We expend a great deal of mental effort preserving the integrity of our purchase decisions and would rather not have the thinking muddied by purchases made at ever-higher prices due to subscriptions. In our opinion, this alternative risks devolving the initial investment decision back to the subscribing party, who are likely-as-not unaware if their additional role as stock picker.
3. Match subscriptions to new ideas with a right to draw down or defer subscriptions as necessary. In our opinion this is the superior strategy as incremental funding is invested in new fifty cent dollars, thereby lowering the price to value ratio of the fund and with the effect that new investors bring something to the party. We have guesstimated that we may be able to find incremental investments at the rate of one per month. This is a best guess on our part and if pushed we will concede that it looks high; ideas may be far less frequent than that. New holdings average 5% of Partnership assets at purchase, a fact that dictates incremental funding is limited to around 5% of assets per month.

Route 3 is the most equitable way to run the Partnership in our opinion but does require patience on the part of new investors whose subscriptions may need to be staggered over several quarters. Even so we have been surprised by the support this eccentric regime has received. The largest non-Marathon  investor in the Partnership noted that one of the reasons they chose to invest was precisely because of the emphasis placed on performance over asset gathering. This investor then offered to pro-rata their subscription should we request, in effect extending their subscription period to make way for other co-investors. Such courtesy is exceptional in this industry but captures the spirit in which we are trying to run the Partnership. Bravo! We have no interest in diluting the quality of our Partners from what we believe to be a very high level.