# Nick Sleep on Scale Economics Shared

> How might corporate success be predictable? There are some clues in the world around us. Zak and I observe several business models that work in the long run, and scale economics shared is one of these, witness Ryanair, Wal-Mart, Geico, Southeast Airlines, Tesco, Nebraska Furniture Mart, Direct Line et al. And that is why companies that share scale with the customer such as Carpetright, Costco, Berkshire Hathaway, Amazon and AirAsia make up around sixty percent of the Partnership. ** It works because it turns size, normally an anchor to growth and returns, into an asset** . But I also don’t think this is a great secret.

Investors see the information (on conference calls they cheer “great quarter, Wal- Mart”) but, in our opinion, they incorrectly weigh the information. It could be argued that lots of things had to go right for Wal-Mart to grow for forty years. That is certainly true but, at its heart, a very few simple things really mattered. In our opinion, the central engine of success at Wal-Mart was a thrift orientation fueling growth with the savings shared with the customer. The culture of the firm celebrated this orientation and reinforced the good behavior. This is the deep reality of the business. This should have had the greatest weighting in the minds of long-term investors even if other things looked more important at the time. Instead investors may place too much emphasis on valuation heuristics, or margin trends, or incremental growth rates in revenues or any of the list above, but these items are transitory and anecdotal in nature.

**There are very few business models where growth begets growth. Scale economics turns size into an asset.** Companies that follow this path are at a huge advantage compared to those, for example, that suffer from Barbie syndrome. Put simply: average companies do not do scale economics shared. Average companies do not have a healthy culture. After all, average companies are more like GM than Wal-Mart! The removal of a portion of failure risk from the investment equation creates a huge opportunity for those investors that can see the company in its true perspective and act with a bit of patience. It is a huge anomaly that investors recognize success incrementally when the factors that lead to success, such as scale economics shared reinforced by a strong culture, may be constant. If the early investors in Wal-Mart had understood this, they may have retained their holding along with the, now billionaire, Walton family.




See [[Scale Economics Shared]]