# A Typical Purchase, Expected Returns and Portfolio Management

Our aim is to make investments at prices we consider to be fifty cents on the dollar of what a typical firm is worth. [[Capital Allocation]] by investee companies must be consistent with value creation and, if this is the case, we expect that the real value of the business (the 100 cents value) could grow at around 10% per annum. The effect over five years will be to compound $1 of value into $1.62, and companies that can build value like this are normally rewarded in the market at fair valuation (i.e, are priced close to $1.62), This happy outcome would imply a return from purchase price (50 cents) of around 26% per annum. 

So, what happens when we are wrong? Our most common mistake is to misjudge capital allocation decisions by our companies: firms which articulate a share repurchase/debt repayment strategy and have incentives to reinforce that outcome, throw caution to the wind and make acquisitions instead. The Partnership's investment in Readers Digest falls into this category. Capital allocation mistakes such as these often prevent the compounding of value but to date have rarely resulted in a permanent decline in the share price to below our purchase price (50 cents). 

We have therefore tended to find out that our mistakes atrophy (stay cheap) rather than collapse, although we can all name one collapse!

If over five years our mistakes are on aggregate flat, and our mistakes total half of Partnership assets, then this implies a compounded annual return of 13% for the portfolio as a whole. Not each year, and maybe not for several consecutive years, but over time this level of expectations appears reasonable to us. This model is daftly precise, a little bit too neat and the one thing we can almost guarantee is that returns will not be exactly be 13%. It is important however that we all understand the investment process and the time frames involved.

The prime determinant of outcome are price (sticking to 50 cents on the dollar) and capital allocation by management. The first is in our control, that is, it is in our control to be patient and wait for the right price. the second involves a subjective judgment about the quality of management, and an assessment about the sustainability of business returns in the long run. It is these factors that occupy almost all our time. 