# Nothing but Net

## by Marc Mahaney

## There will be blood ... when you pick bad stocks

If you invest in the stock market, you will lose money from time to time. Being a good stock picker involves being both a good fundamentalist - correctly forecasting revenues and profits - and a good psychologist - correctly guessing what multiples the market will place on those revenues and profits. It's very, very hard to get both of those right most of the time. Then there are always market shock events - think Covid 19 pandemic in early 2020 - that are impossible to forecast and can undermine the best laid stock-picking plans. Investing requires grit.

You will also lose money from time to time because you will almost certainly make some bad stock calls. I had been professionally analyzing stocks for almost 15 years when I got Zulily wrong, and I knew that management team well. What I didn't appreciate well enough was how its customer value proposition limited its TAM and its growth outlook. I had been professionally analyzing stocks for almost 20 years when I got Blue Apron wrong, largely because I either overestimated the abilities of the management team or underestimated the challenges the company faced. I may have gotten Groupon largely right, but its unprecedented growth and highly innovative business model attracted a lot of market interest and investor capital. You can't get every stock call right, and even "sure thing" stocks can go down 70%, 80%, 90%. 


## There will be blood ... even if you pick the best stocks

Even best-in-class stocks aren't immune from company-specific sell-offs. Facebook, Google, and Netflix - three of the best performing stocks of 2015-2020 - all experienced major corrections (from 20% to 40%) during that period. In the case of Netflix, it was twice in a 12-month period. Despite fundamentals that were at times dramatically better than those of other tech stocks - and 95%+ of the S&P500 - these stocks experienced major setbacks, before recovering to continue to materially outperform the market. 

Even best-in-class stocks aren't immune from broad market sell-offs. In late 2018, in the wake of a broad market correction tied to trade war concerns, global GDP growth, and rising interest rates, AMZN lost a third of its value, despite no change in its estimates or growth outlooks. Be ready to endure material pullbacks, even with best-in-class companies and stocks. There will be blood, for reasons that can sometimes be totally out of the control of specific companies.

## Don't play quarters

Don't play quarters. Successfully trading around quarters requires both an accurate read of fundamentals and a correct assessment of near-term expectations, a tricky task for individual (and most professional) investors to pull off. Trades around quarters can also be misleading and can cause investors to miss long-term fundamental and stock trends. Between 2015 and 2018, AMZN rocketed up 386%, with 4 of the 16 quarters generating a material 10% one-day pop and 4 quarters generating a material 5%+ one-day slide. Staying invested in a strong fundamental name and ignoring short-term stock fluctuations can be highly profitable.

Quarter trades are strongly determined by expectations. Fundamentals may be clearly improving (revenue growth acceleration and operating margin expansion) but stocks can still trade down on these results if "whisper" expectations aren't met. This si what happened to Snap with the March 2019 quarter and Chewy with the April 2020 quarter. There may also be unusual events - like IPO lockup expirations - that cause near-term stock movements that are disjointed versus fundamental trends. This is what happened with Uber in November 2019. Don't let this dissuade you from investing, but do let it dissuade you from short-term trading. From overreacting to near-term stock fluctuations, don't play quarters. 

## Revenues matter more than anything

Over the long term, fundamentals really do move stocks, and for tech stocks, the fundamentals that matter most are revenue, revenue, and revenue. Companies that consistently generate 20%+ top-line growth - either in revenue or in their key customer metric - these are companies that can potentially provide good stock returns, almost regardless fo their near-term profitability outlooks. That's the 20% revenue growth "rule". Consistent 20%+ top-line growth - what I would label premium revenue growth - is three to four times faster that that of the S&P500 and hard to sustain.  It can often reflect large market opportunities, relentless and successful product innovation, compelling value propositions, and top-quality management teams. This is exactly what you want to be looking for in good long-term investing opportunities. As a start, look for companies that have generated 20%+ growth for five or six quarters in a row. Past performance can sometimes be an indicator of future performance. 

Companies with sharply decelerating revenue growth - for example, revenue growth rates that get cut in half over three or four quarters - are likely to work poorly as longs, especially if that deceleration is driven by market share losses, market saturation, or management mis-execution. When that deceleration is driven by major events like the Covid 19 crisis, it's a different matter. Conversely, stocks of companies that are successfully executing GCIs (growth curve initiatives) and generating revenue growth acceleration can be good outperformers. Growth curve initiatives in particular are useful for investors because they can provide great catalysts for stock price appreciation. When GCIs such as new product launches, geographic market expansion, and price increases work, they can lead to revenue growth acceleration and often margin expansion, opening up the earnings growth aperture and leading to a re-rating in the stock's multiple. Look for GCIs. 

Successful tech investing doesn't mean being oblivious to profits. Profitless growth creates no value in the long run. But the history of many of the leading tech companies over the last two decades demonstrates that revenue growth - especially premium revenue growth - is a good indicator of future profitability. Either the company will start getting leverage against largely fixed costs (G&A, building expenses, some R&D), or its growing scale will allow its unit economics to improve, as the company gains leverage against its suppliers and through increased experience and scale becomes more efficient at managing its costs. 

## It don't mean a thing if it ain't got that product swing

Product innovation matters. Successful product innovation is one of the biggest drivers of fundamentals, especially revenue growth, and that's what drives stocks. Successful product innovation can generate entirely new revenue streams (Amazon with cloud computing), replace existing revenue streams (Netflix with DVDs and streaming), and enhance existing revenue streams and boost key customer metrics (Spotify with podcasting, plausibly Stitch Fix with direct buy functionality). Successful product innovation can be a significant driver of stock prices over time, if you can spot it. 

Product innovation is spottable. Few public investors, including me, realized early on how revolutionary cloud computing would be, how sizeable a market opportunity is presented. But cloud computing did become  a widely reported-upon trend in the years after AWS was launched, and all an investor had to do was realize that this could be a material opportunity and that it was being led by a company initially famous for selling books online and conclude that Amazon was an innovative company. The cost of doing due diligence on Netflix's streaming innovation? $7.99. Some of the most interesting product innovation going on today is consumer-driven. Think of gig-economy companies like Airbnb, Doordash, Lyft, and Uber that barely existed 10 years ago. You're a consumer. You can try out the services, and if you find one you really love, it could be the making of a great stock idea. Finally, when you see one company's innovations aggressively copied by others (Snap's features copied by Facebook), chances are that first company is a legitimate innovator.

Product innovation is a repeatable offense. A company or a management team that generates one or two impressive product innovations may well have the ability to continue to generate more innovations. When a company such as an Amazon "invents" online retail, cloud computing, and Kindles, it likely has the ability to innovate in other areas (like advertising revenue or Echo devices or cahier-less stores) because it has processes in place or a culture or a management team that fosters successful product innovation. If Netflix can successfully innovate on streaming, then it may well be able to successfully innovate on original content and then local-language original content - which is wha it has done. Sometimes past success is an indicator of future performance. 

## TAMs - the bigger the better

TAM matters. The bigger the total addressable market, the greater the opportunity for premium revenue growth, which is a major driver of tech and growth stocks. A lot of other factors are important - the level of product innovation, the strength of the product's or services's value proposition to customers, and the quality of the management team - but a large TAM creates the opportunity for substantial growth. A T TAM ($1 trillion TAM like Google faces with the global advertising market) creates the opportunity for substantial growth from scale. T TAMs are very rare, but look for companies that have the potential to "pull a Google" - to generate premium revenue growth from scale. As a rule of thumb, a company with a single-digit percentage share of a large TAM might be an ideal candidate for tech investors to consider.

TAMs can be expanded. By removing the friction and by adding new use cases, TAMs can be made larger. That's essentially what Lyft and Uber did over the years. By lowering prices, increasing the number of drivers on its platform, reducing wait times, and making payments and eventually tipping seamless, Uber expanded the use cases and thus the addressable market for ridesharing. There are also two specific steps that companies can take to expand their TAMs - expand into new geographic markets and generate new revenue streams. As of early 2021, DoorDash is in the process of doing both of these things. Its long-term success in doing so will have a major impact on its perceived TAM, on its growth rate potential, and thus on its stock market success. 

Sometimes TAMs are hard to ascertain, especially when a traditional industry is being disrupted. And creative new approaches are required. This was the case with Spotify, which was attacking two well-known markets (the recorded music industry and radio advertising), but was doing it in a way that potentially meant it was facing a much bigger market than appeared at first listen. The proliferation of smartphones (3 billion and counting) has likely upended all media markets, potentially expanding the TAM for all media models. Friction has been removed. Media can now be easily consumed practically 24/7. The market opportunity and the growth opportunity may well be greater for the best media offerings. 

Large TAMs can help drive growth that can lead to scale, which has intrinsic benefits. There are four specific benefits: experience curves, unit economics advantages, competitive moats, and network effects. With scale come the learning opportunities to operate better/smarter, with scale come the opportunities to operate more cost effectively, with scale comes the opportunity to increase the entry costs for new competition, and with scale comes the opportunity to feed off network effects. These are all different, but they are all benefits from scale. Scale doesn't just matter. Scale wins. Large TAMs increase the opportunities for companies to tap into these scale benefits.


## Follow the value prop, not the money

Follow the consumer value proposition. Some of the best performing stocks of the past decade belong to companies that prioritized customer satisfaction way over near-term investors concerns. Amazon may well be the poster child here. The company consistently demonstrated a willingness to invest aggressively to offer a more compelling value proposition, even at the sacrifice of near-term profits. It launch of Prime in early 2005 is a classic example. Margins came down, and capex more than doubled. What came out is arguably the single best customer loyalty program in Internet history. And maybe the "best bargain in the history of shopping." Regardless, the company in online retail that developed and aggressively invested to maintain the industry's leading consumer value proposition won, both in terms of fundamentals and in terms of stock price performance. 

Investor-centric companies can make lousy investments. I see both eBay and Grubhub as examples of companies that didn't focus enough on innovating to meet consumer needs, in part, I believe, out of a strong desire to preserve highly profitable business models. Because of this, both companies ended up providing mixed results for long-term investors. In all fairness, GRUB was a spectacular Long from early 2016 to late 2018, en eBay performed spectacularly well for the five years post its IPO and selectively well over the past five years. With both companies, however, I am most struck by how much they left on the table, fiven the truly dramatic market share and market cap gains of their biggest competitors - Amazon and DoorDash - both of which prioritized consumer needs. I don't believe it's game over for either company (though GRUB has been acquired) or for any company that is investor-centric. While pivots toward consumer-centric companies can be expensive and daunting - and will likely be first punished in the public markets - they can be successful, as Zillow may well be proving with its Direct Buy pivot (note by Julien: the Zillow experience failed.)

Even though compelling consumer value propositions can be expensive to build and maintain, they can eventually carry positive business model effects. Some of this is straightforward in terms of deep customer loyalty, greater customer retention, and lower churn. All of which are long-term beneficial to the business model. But compelling value propositions can also enable pricing power flywheels, which is what both Amazon and, especially, Netflix have benefited from. Pricing power among consumer-facing companies is rare. Who wants to pay more for a good or a service? When that good or service is compelling, then consumers will accept price increases, which enable companies to invest in further improving the good or the service, pushing the flywheel. Which means that consumer-centric companies can generate good returns for long-term investors. 

## M is for management

Management teams really matter. The quality of the management team is possible the single most important factor in tech investing. Because in the long term, stocks are largely driven by fundamentals, and fundamentals are largely driven by management teams. Get the management team right, and you'll likely get the stock right. TAMs matter too. As do relentlessly pursuing product innovation and getting the value proposition right. But management teams largely control the last two factors. SO if you get the management team right, you'll likely get the fundamentals right, and thus the stock right. 

Here's what to look for in a management team. Founder-led companies (practically all the biggest tech stocks have been founder-led), long-term orientation (like Zuckerberg with 1-, 5- and 10-year goals), great industry vision (Hastings essentially inventing streaming), a maniacal focus on customer satisfaction (read the Amazon shareholder letters), deep technology backgrounds and operating benches, a deep focus on product innovation, the ability to recruit and retain the best talent, and the ability to be forth-right with employees and investors about mistakes and challenges. You will rarely get all of these, and you don't need to have all of these. But you'll want to find most of these to believe in the quality of the management team. 

Unlike investment funds, with management teams, past performance is an indicator of future performance. When you have management teams that have built successful track records, you stick with them. A successful track record doesn't mean consistently beating Street quarterly earnings estimates - that's expectation management, not fundamentals generation. A successful track record doesn't mean having a fab-looking stock chart - lots of factors go into near term stock movements. A successful track record does mean generating consistent premium revenue growth, successfully introducing new products and feature improvements, and winning greater customer satisfaction and loyalty. These fundamentals and their core drivers will likely deliver good-looking long-term stock charts. The management team is most responsible for those fundamentals and those core drivers. 

## Valuation is in the eye of the tech stockholder

Valuation should not be the most important factor in the stock-picking decision process. Valuation frameworks can be useful in picking tech stocks, but valuation is not a science, and it carries what I call precision traps - precise answers where precision isn't realistic, possible, or justified. Action questions will vary based on whether the company is generating robust earnings, minimal earnings, or no earnings. But you overriding action question should always be: does the current valuation look ballpark reasonable?


Tech stocks can at times look expensive, but that doesn't make them bad stocks. P/E multiples in a vacuum isn't that useful. It's always important to look at them on a growth-adjusted basis. Higher growth stocks warrant higher P/E multiples, because the earnings stream of a high-growth company is worth more than the earnings stream of a low-growth company (assuming similar capital intensity and cash flow dynamics). High quality earnings - earnings that are driven first by revenue growth and second by operating margin expansion and earnings that convert strongly into free cash flow - will also warrant higher P/E multiples.

In the case of companies with robust earnings, a P/E multiple in line with or or at a modest premium to a company's forward EPS growth is ballpark reasonable. For example, a company with a 20% EPS growth outlook can reasonably trade at a 20x P/E multiple to as high as a 30x or even 40x P/E multiple and still be considered to be ballpark reasonably valued. The key action question: how sustainable is that earnings growth? How much confidence do you have in that 20% growth, which is rare, premium growth. Does the company's TAM, management team, level of product innovation, and customer value proposition support that level of growth?

High quality stocks that trade at a discount to premium growth rates can make excellent investments for long-term investors. These situations are rare, but they do happen. Both PCLN and FB traded for long stretches of time at discounts to their growth rates, which helped create great long opportunities with both stocks. The win for investors is that these stocks will be powered by those premium growth rates, with limited risk of P/E multiple declines and the potential for P/E expansion - the double positive whammy outcome!

In the case of companies with minimal earnings, you can often expect to see super high (>40x) P/E multiples, but these can still be good investments. Both Amazon and Netflix proved this. The key action question: Are current earnings being materially depressed by major investments? Is there a reason to believe that long-term operating margins for a company can be dramatically higher than current levels? And can the company sustain premium revenue growth for a substantial period of time? If the answers to these questions are positive, then those super high P/E multiples may well be justified. 


The case of companies with no earnings provides the toughest valuation challenges, but four logic test questions and valuation comparisons based on factors like revenue (price to sales) can help determine whether a valuation is ballpark reasonable. The four logic test questions for companies that are currently unprofitable:
1. Are there any public companies with similar business models that are already profitable?
2. If the company as a whole isn't profitable, are there segments within the business that are?
3. Is there a reason why scale can't drive a business to profitability?
4. Are there concrete steps that management can take to drive the company to profitability?

## Hunt for DHQs - Dislocated High-Quality Stocks

Look for DHQs - dislocated high-quality stocks. One of the best ways to make money as an investor in high-growth tech stocks is to identify the highest-quality companies and then to buy them or add to positions when they are dislocated. Investing in high-quality companies - marked by premium revenue growth and driven by large TAMs, relentless product innovation, compelling customer value propositions, and great management - reduces fundamentals risk. Buying when they are dislocated - 20-30% corrections and/or when stocks are trading at a discount to their growth rates - reduces valuation/multiple risk.

How to tell when stocks are dislocated:
- When a stock has traded off 20-30%
- When a stock trades at a discount to its growth rates - that is, when its P/E multiples are lower than its expected forward EPS growth rate or a PEG<1
Both these rules require some judgment calls. For example, a stock that retraces 20% after shooting up 100% in three months isn't terribly dislocated. But these rules can help identify dislocated stocks. My experience has been that every single high-quality company gets dislocated at some point, providing patient long-term investors with plenty of opportunities. Even the highest-quality stocks I covered over the last five years (Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, and Google) were each dislocated a handful of times over that period. 

How to judge a high-quality company. From the perspective of a seasoned tech analyst, my argument is that the best fundamental tell of a high-quality company is consistent premium revenue growth (20%+). And the key fundamental drivers of premium revenue growth are four: relentless product innovation, large TAMs, compelling customer value proposition, and great management. Lots of judgment calls in here, but these are the drivers that I have found most important in determining the long-term fundamental outlook for companies. 

When to sell a stock. The key sell indicator that i have observed has been a material deterioration in the fundamentals of a company. to be more specific, when revenue growth decelerates materially (50% deceleration within a year or less that is not driven by a macro event like the Covid-19 pandemic) or when revenue growth materially dips below 20%, adjusting for comps and macro shocks. These indicators are specific to high-growth tech stocks, but there is a rather long list now of tech stocks that have gone from outperforming to underperforming for a lengthy period period when they have experienced material revenue growth deceleration: Booking, Criteo, eBay, Snap, Shutterstock, Tripadvisor, TrueCar, Twitter, Yahoo!, Yelp, and others. Tech investors shoudl be wary of sharp revenue growth deceleration. Growth thrills. Substantial deceleration kills. 