
Industrial Economics 101 teaches that the fewer competitors there are in a market, the better it is for producers. It is a true statement up to a point: on a statistical basis, industries do get more profitable with higher concentration. But the broad averages obscure the fact that many industries are outliers and multiple rivals do not always impair performance. What determines if industry concentration leads to a good or bad outcome is often circumstancial.

Consider two of the world's most famous duopolies: Coca-cola and Pepsi in soft drinks; Airbus and Boeing in aircraft manufacturing. The nature of their businesses is highly different. Coca-Cola and Pepsi sell branded, fast-moving consumer goods. Airbus and Boeing develop high technology equipment with long lead times. Even when it comes to market share, the pairs differ. Coca-Cola clearly dominates Pepsi, while Airbus and Boeing share their market pretty evenly. In the aircraft business pricing is opaque, while in the soft drinks it is far more transparent. It would not necessarily be obvious from these descriptions, but the margins and returns generated by the soft drinks manufacturers have been meaningfully superior to those achieved in the aircraft market.

Clues as of the relative attractiveness of the two industries appear by probing who the customers are and how the selling is done. In contrast to the soft drinks industry, the aircraft industry sells to a concentrated industrial customer base and every individual sale is negociated hard. This puts pressure on pricing, and ultimately, industry profitability. In any industry, it is important to assess if the competition is as real at the micro-level as it appears at the macro-level.  Sometimes what seems to be a competitive market is rather a latticework of smaller monopoly-like structures where all participants extract high profits.

Consider the differences between duopolies and oligopolies. When a company has only one competitor, it quickly becomes a corporate lightning rod. It can easily become a corporate obsession to beat the other company all the time. A case in point: the intense rivalry between Airbus and Boeing which contributes to the relatively poor economics of the industry.

Add a few more competitors - make the duopoly an oligopoly - and participants often think differently. Beating multiple competitors all the time is impossible, so companies focus on beating weaker competitors whilst leaving the stronger ones alone. Such an environment prevailed for years in the hearing aid market, and this ultimately resulted in the two dominant makers - William Demant and Sonova - consistently taking share from weaker competitors.

As a general rule, an oligopoly is preferable to a fragmented and volatile competitive landscape. On top of that, one should look for oligopolies where the industry structure has been relatively stable  over time and where the logic persists for that stability being maintained.  The investor should tend to prefer the leading players in oligopolistic markets, especially in industries where competitive advantages in areas such as R&D and A&P are enhanced by market leadership.