# Patience

Patience, or the lack thereof. At the beginning of the annual general meeting of the Berkshire Hathaway Company they show a video in which Buffett is asked what the main difference between and himself the average investor is, and he answers "*patience*". There is so little of it about these days: has anyone heard of getting rich slowly? Jack Bogle, founder of the Vanguard Group, claims that the holding period for stocks is down to 10 months and the average mutual fund is held for 2 years. What's all that about? And this behavior feeds back into how managers then report to their clients, to the extent that quarterly reporting borders on an obsessive-compulsive disorder. And how did we get to this state of affairs?

I think the problem is two agents, the fund manager and his immediate client, try to eke out some value added in the mind of their clients, and it creates these counter-productive consequences. Few people honestly believe this is the right way to behave, but they think that is what is expected of them by others, and so a spiral of dysfunctional behavior is established. You would never get this level of reporting nonsense if it was on a principal-to-principal basis!

And who is to blame? I side against the investments institutions. These are largely rich organizations and should behave with integrity, not bow to dysfunctional requests. And it is so unnecessary: as investors we own the only permanent capital in a company's capital structure, everything else in the company: management, assets, board, employees, can change but, absent bankruptcy, our equity will still be there! Institutional investors have never really reconciled their ability to trade daily with the permanence of equity. Are they long-term or short-term?