
# Personal Energy

Human beings, like all living things, need energy to live and to thrive. Men and women used to spend most of their daily energy on physical tasks. For most of human history, men and women were working at hunting and gathering, raising children, ,and raising crops, most of their time consumed with energy-intensive physical labor.

Nowadays, many of us are knowledge workers, and we use our brains to do the heavy lifting. The brain is a very energy-hungry organ. Of the roughly two thousand calories we consume in a day, five hundred go to running our brains. That's astonishing: the brain represents only about 2 percent of our body weight, and yet it takes up 25 percent of the energy we consume every day. It's no wonder that the way we *invest our attention* is critical to whether or not we feel high or low energy.

We engage in physical and mental activities all day long. Some activities sustain our energy and some drain it; we want to track those energy flows as part of a "Good Time Journal" exercise. Once we have a good handle on where our energy goes every week, we can start redesigning our activities to maximize our vitality. Remember, [[Designing your life]]  is about getting more out of your current life - and not only about redesigning a whole new life. Even if questions about some big change in your life got you interested on the topic, most life design work is directed at tuning up and improving the life you're in, without having to make huge structural changes like changing jobs or moving or going back to grad school.

You may be wondering "isn't tracking my energy level kind of the same thing as tracking how engaged I am?" Yes and No. Yes, high levels of engagement often coincide with high levels of energy, but not necessarily. A colleague of Dave's, a brilliantly fast-thinking computer engineer, found arguing for his point of view an engaging activity, because it made hum think on his feet. He was great at it, and often found other people at work asking him to make their arguments for the. But he notice that getting into those arguments totally exhausted him, even when he "won". He was not a contentious person, and though it seemed fun at the time to outwit others, he always felt terrible when it was over. Energy is also unique in that it can go negative - some activities can actually suck the life right out of us and send us drained into whatever comes next. Boredom is a big energy-suck, but it's much easier to recover from boredom than from being de-energized, so it's important to pay specific attention to your energy levels.