# Physical And Online Presence
It may seem obvious that commercial enterprises must have an online presence today, but the success of this type of forward integration is not guaranteed. A good starting point is a powerful global [[Brands]]. The success of the Nike and (Inditex) Zara online businesses underlines how compelling such a strategy can be for brands that already enjoy a strong position in the consumers' consciousness. A second important factor is logistics infrastructure and capabilities. A direct-to-consumer online offering can add material complexities and costs. Those businesses  able to leverage existing infrastructure are often best positioned to succeed: Nike and Inditex being exemplars once again.

Forward Integration via online retailing can also dovetail well with physical forward integration, suggested by examples as varied as Apple Stores and Nestlé's Nespresso outlets. These company-owned stores, one purveying Ipads, the other coffee, both launched in the early 2000s as the move to online retailing was gathering momentum. Both used physical stores to enhance customer experiences by picking good locations (exclusive locations help confer [[Social status]]) and emphasizing service and advice (the Genius bar in Apple Stores and free coffees at Nespresso). Coupled with a strong online offering, the retail outlets helped both companies to develop a powerful ecosystem that allowed them closer control of customer experiences and which delivered higher margins by cutting out middlemen.