# Picking DNA's Locks

Because they are so short-lived compared with their hosts, parasites can be quicker to evolve and adapt. In about ten years, genes of the AIDS  virus change as much as human genes in ten million years. For bacteria, thirty minutes can be lifetime. Human beings, whose generations are an eternal thirty years long, are evolutionary tortoises.

Evolutionary tortoises none the less do more genetic mixing that evolutionary hares. Austin Burt's discovery of a correlation between generation length and amount of recombination is evidence of the Red Queen at work. The longer your generation time, the more genetic mixing you need to combat your parasites. Bell and Burt also discovered that the mere present of a rogue parasitic chromosome called a B-chromosome is enough to induce extra recombination (more genetic mixing) in a species. Sex seems to be an essential part of combating parasites. But how?

Leaving aside for the moment such things as fleas and mosquitoes, let us concentrate on viruses, bacteria and fungi, the causes of most diseases. they specialize in breaking into cells, either to eat them, as fungi and bacteria do, or like viruses, to subvert their genetic machinery for the purpose of making new viruses. Either way, they must get into cells. To do that they employ protein molecules that fit into other molecules on cell surfaces: in the jargon, they bind. The arms races between parasites and their hosts are all about these binding proteins.

Parasites invent new keys; hosts change the locks. there is an obvious group-selectionist argument here for sex: at any one time a sexual species will have lots of different locks; members of an asexual one will have the same locks. So a parasite with the right key will quickly exterminate the asexual species but not the sexual one. Hence the well-known fact that by turning our fields over to monocultures of increasingly inbred strains of wheat and maize we are inviting the very epidemics of disease that can only be fought by the pesticides we are forced to use in ever larger quantities.

The Red Queen's case is both subtler and stronger than that, though. It is that an individual, by having sex, can produce offspring more likely to survive than an individual that produces clones of itself. The advantage of sex can appear in a single generation. this is because whatever lock is common in one generation will produce among the parasites the key that fits it. So you can be sure that it is the very lock not to have a few generations later. For by then the key that fits it will be common. Rarity is a premium.

Sexual species can call on a sort of library of locks that is unavailable to asexual species. This library is known by two long words which mean roughly the same thing: heterozygosity and polymorphism. They are the things that animals lose when their lineage become inbred. What they mean is that in the population at large (polymorphism) and in each individual as well (heterozygosity) there are different versions of the same gene at any one time. The polymorphic blue and brown eyes of westerners are a good example: many brown eyed people carry the recessive gene for blue eyes as well - they are heterozygous. 

Such polymorphisms are almost as puzzling as sex to true Darwinists because they imply that one gene is as good as the other. Surely, if brown eyes were marginally better than blue (or, more to the point, if normal genes were better than sickle-cell anemia cells) then one would have gradually driven the other extinct. So why on earth are we stuffed full of so many different versions of genes? Why is there so much heterozygosity? 

In the case of sickle-cell anemia it is because the sickle gene helps to defeat malaria, so the heterozygotes (those with one normal gene and one sickle gene) are better off than those with normal genes where malaria is common, whereas the homozygotes (those with two normal genes or two sickle genes) suffer from malaria and anemia respectively.


This example is so well worn from over-use in biology textbooks that it is hard to realize that it is not just another anecdote, but an example of a common theme. For it transpires that many of the most notoriously polymorphic genes, such as the blood groups, the histocompatibility antigens and the likes, are the very genes that affect resistance to disease - the genes for locks. Moreover, some of these polymorphisms are astonishingly ancient. They have persisted for aeons. For example, there are genes that have several versions in mankind, and the equivalent genes in cows also have several versions, but what is bizarre is that the cows have the very same versions of the gene as mankind.
This means like you, reader, might have a gene that is more like the gene of a certain cow than it is like the equivalent gene in your spouse. Some very powerful force is at work ensuring that most versions of each gene survive, and that no version changes very much.

That force is almost certainly disease. As soon as a lock gene becomes rare, the parasite key gene that fits it becomes rare, so that lock gains an advantage. In a case where rarity is a premium, the advantage is always swinging from one gene to another and no gene is ever allowed to become extinct.

To be sure, there are other mechanisms that can favor polymorphism. Anything that gives rare genes a selective advantage over common genes. Predators often do this, by overlooking rare forms and picking out common forms. Give a bird in a cage some concealed pieces of food, most of which are painted red but a few painted green, and it will quickly get the idea that red things are edible, and will initially overlook green things. J. B. S. Haldane was the first to realize that parasitism, even more than predation, could help to maintain polymorphism, especially if the parasite's increased success in attacking a new variety of host goes with reduced success against an old variety - which would be the case with keys and locks.

The key and lock metaphor deserves closer scrutiny. In flax, for example, there are twenty-seven versions of five different genes that confer resistance to a rust fungus: twenty-seven versions of five locks. Each lock is fitted by several versions of one key gene in the rust. The virulence of the rust fungus attack is determined by how well its five keys fit the flax's five locks. It is not quite like real keys and locks because there are partial fits: the rust does not have to open every lock before it can infect the flax. But the more locks it opens, the more virulent its effects.

### The similarity between sex and vaccination

At this point the alert know-alls among my readers will be seething with impatience at my neglect of the immune system. The normal way to fight a disease, they point out, it not to have sex but to produce antibodies, by vaccination or whatever. The immune system is a fairly recent invention in evolutionary terms: it started in the reptiles perhaps 300 million years ago. Frogs, fish, insects, lobsters, snails and water fleas do not have immune systems. 

Even so, there is now an ingenious theory that marries the immune system with sex in an overarching Red Queen hypothesis. Hans Bremermann, of the University of California at Berkeley, is its author and he makes a fascinating case for the interdependence of the two. The immune system, he points out, would not work without sex.

The immune system consists of white blood cells which come in about ten million different types. Each type has a protein lock on it called an antibody, which corresponds to a key carried by a bacterium called an antigen. If a key enters that lock, the white cell starts multiplying ferociously so as to produce an army of white cells to gobble up the key-carrying invader, be it a flu virus, a tuberculosis bacterium or even the cells of a transplanted heart.

But the body has a problem. It cannot keep armies of each antibody lock ready to immobilize all types of keys, because there is room for millions of cells of one type, or one cell each of millions of types, but not for millions of cells of millions of types. So it keeps only a few copies of each white cell. As soon as one type of white cell meets the antigen that fits its locks, it begins multiplying. Hence the delay between the onset of flu and the immune response that cures you.

Each lock is generated by a sort of random assembly device, which tries to maintain as broad a library of kinds of locks as it can, even if some of the keys that fit them have never yet been found in parasites. This is because the parasites are continually changing their keys to try to find ones that fit the host's changing locks. The immune system is therefore prepared. But this randomness means that the host is bound to produce white cells that are designed to attack its own cells among the many types it invents. To get around this, the host's own cells are equipped with a password, known as a major histocompatibility antigen.This stops the attack.(Please excuse the mixed metaphor - keys and locks and passwords - it does not get any more mixed.)


To win, then the parasite must either hope to infect somebody else by the time the immune response hits (as influenza does), conceal itself inside host cells (as the AIDS virus does), change its own keys frequently (as malaria does) or try to imitate whatever password the host's own cells carry that enable them to escape attention. Bilharzia parasites, for instance, grab password molecules from host cells and stick them all over their bodies to camouflage themselves from passing white cells. Trypanosomes, which cause sleeping sickness, keep changing their keys by switching on one gene after another.

The AIDS virus is the craftiest of all. According to one theory, it seems to keep mutating so that each generation has different keys. Time after time the host has locks that fit the keys and the virus gets suppressed. But eventually, after perhaps ten years, the virus's random mutation hits upon a key that the host just does not have a lock for. At that point, the virus has won. It has found the gap in the repertoire of the immune system's locks and it runs riot. In essence, according to this theory, the AIDS virus evolves until it finds a chink in the body's immune behavior.


Other parasites try to mimic the passwords carried by the host. The selective pressure is on all pathogens to mimic the passwords of their hosts.The selective pressure is on all hosts to keep changing the password. This, according to Bremermann, is where sex comes in.

The histocompatibility genes, which determine more than the passwords, but are themselves responsible for susceptibility to disease, are richly polymorphic. There are over one hundred versions of each histocompatibility gene in the average population of mice, and even more in human beings. Every person carries a unique combination, which is why transplants between people other than identical twins are always rejected, unless special drugs are taken. And without sexual outbreeding, it is impossible to maintain that polymorphism.

Is this conjecture or is there a proof? In 1991 Adrian Hill and his colleagues from Oxford University produced the first good evidence that the variability of histocompatibility genes is driven by disease. they found that one kind of histocompatibility gene, HLA-BW53, is frequent where malaria is common and very rare elsewhere. Moreover, children ill with malaria generally do not have HLA-BW53. That may be why they are ill. And in an extraordinary discovery made by Wayne Potts at the University of Florida at Gainesville, house ice appear to choose as mates only those house mice that have difference histocompatibility genes from their own. They do this by smell. This preference maximizes the variety of genes in mice and makes the young mice more disease resistant.