# Pricing Auto Insurance
by #InPractise 

### Monika, can you provide a short introduction to your background in the insurance business?

I have been in the insurance industry since 1994. I have worked for several insurance companies, such as AXA, Allianz, Generali and ERGO, for big international corporates. But I’ve also worked for a regional company, called Provinzial, which is a public insurer in Germany. I am a trained non-life actuary and, therefore, I was always focused on non-life business. I covered several different functions and roles and I always reported to C-level or was myself at C-level. The first time I was promoted to a board, as an executive member, was 2005. Today, I am non-executive independent director for two boards.

My first love in the insurance industry was the motor business because it was the first one where we really faced challenges and where we had new methodologies applied and my knowledge, as an actuary, was highly appreciated. I could apply most reasoned methods and statistical methodologies.

### Can we take a step back, into the 90s, and maybe you could share a bit of context to exactly how motor insurance was underwritten, back then?

I think that’s quite interesting, especially in Germany. Until 1994, motor insurance was strictly regulated. Every tariff had to be approved by the regulator and there was a basic structure for the pricing provided by the association for all motor insurers. You weren’t allowed to differ from that, except for your own expenses as an insurance company, if you could prove that your expected claim per risk was lower than the market. You really had to prove it over a long time period. The market was pretty uniform and the main distinguishing element was the cost structure of the different companies.

### It was mainly about acquiring the customer and the cost of the claims and processing the claims, rather than the actual price?

Yes. There was a pretty huge difference between the cheapest and the most expensive because their cost level was very different. There was – and still is – a mutual end of the German market, called HUK-COBURG and it has a cost level, an expense level, of 7.5%. The most expensive ones have a cost level of almost 30%. This cost level was already in place in the 90s and explains the difference between the prices in that area. It was a very competitive market, given the circumstances, and competition exploded after 1994.

### What happened after 1994, in terms of the data and the models that you were using?

The model didn’t really change much. There were just a few additional criteria, such as age of the driver. But the competition and the reduction of prices were enforced and the market lost a huge amount of money. It was the first time that the underwriting side had produced combined ratios about 120% for some insurers. It was a big loss-making period, until the end of the 90s.

### Why was that?

It was because the competition was so harsh and tough and the insurers were not prepared for that. They just gave a flat discount. They gave the competency to trust the price to the sales organization which just reduced the price by 10%, 20%. On the other hand, there was a reduction in frequency but not as fast as the price was reducing.

### What exactly were the models that you were using, back in the 90s, to price the policy?

There were mainly three criteria that were applied. Firstly, the type of car, with its horsepower and so on. Secondly, the region in which the car was driven. Thirdly, the bonus-malus system. These three criteria were provided by the association and are still provided today, by the association, on statistics generated by the whole market.

### How did the industry change to the models used today? What were the big changes, over the last 10 to 20 years?

First of all, all companies started to create their own actuarial departments. When I started, in 1994, everybody asked why my company hired and recruited an actuary for motor insurance; nobody needs an actuary for motor insurance. It’s just one plus one, equals two. They started to hire actuaries to set up generalized linear models, to adapt the IT systems to be more flexible and reactive to the market. Today, almost every company in the market applies GLM models, partly based on their own data and also using the data from the association – which still provides a lot data – to improve and enrich their own data. They partly use the association’s model, adapting it to their own data to some specific criteria which are important for the company.

Today, I think all companies, in the German market, use generalized linear models and some even try to use artificial intelligence and more sophisticated models which are not based on linear interdependency.

### Does the UK or US market, typically, use GLM models as well?

Yes. At the moment, GLM is the state of the art model which is applied in all markets that I know of. Also, in the Asian markets, in India, for example, it is applied. It strongly depends on how sophisticated and how detailed the regulatory framework is; what is allowed and what is not allowed. For example, in the US, you still have some states where you have to ask for approval from the regulator. In India, there are strict regulations about which price you are allowed to charge your customer. There are sometimes restrictions which constrain how you apply what you know by generalized linear models. But as far as I can see, almost all insurance companies use generalized linear models to analyze their own portfolios and to know which part of the portfolio is profit making, which customers they should try to acquire and so on.

For portfolio management, I think most insurers in the world – I don’t know Africa so well – use generalized linear models. It is state of the art methodology.

### Could we walk through it? Let’s say I’m taking out a policy, you are the insurer and you are underwriting my policy. What would be the approach to building a GLM?

I would look for data available in the market. Let’s take the German market because I know it best and it is a very sophisticated and mature market and could work as a model. The first thing is the type of the car, because there is often a difference if you drive a Porsche or a Volvo. From the automotive industry, there is always a number for the car maker and also for the type of the car, so you can identify the car and use some other data to add horsepower or anything else you want to use from the car.

Secondly, the region in which the car is driven. Thirdly, how is the car used. Is it a car used for business purposes or just for private usage? Then, who drives the car, who owns the car? Who is the policy holder? Their age and profession can be very predictive. Then, if you look at the contract, which cover does somebody look for? Is it just third-party liability? That is often an indication that the person is not so strong financially, which is also an indicator. Is CASCO included? If so, there could be a slight reduction in the price.

The next factor is how many miles will you be driving in the car and in which region? Is it countryside, big city or a smaller city? Last but not least, in many markets you have a bonus-malus system and/or a claims history. How experienced is the driver and has he or she already made many claims or not? These are also very predictive criteria.

### With that last point about previous claims, is that just a history of when I’ve claimed or if I’ve claimed, rather than more specific behavior of my driving and data that you might collect on my driving and history?

Normally, you just have the number of claims over the last two, five, six, 10 years. With the telematics that are now available, you can also have a history as to when the claim happened, in what circumstances it happened and so on. At the moment, this is not very often applied. Telematics works very well in the Italian market and there are also some efforts in the UK market, as far as I know, with some successes in implementing it. But in general, telematics is not used in a broad way. In Germany, we started using it two to four years ago. The reason why it doesn’t work so well is that the pricing is already very granular and the added value from telematics is not so strong that sales organizations promote it. You can save 20% if you take the telematics pricing; that doesn’t work because it does not make a significant improvement to their knowledge of the risk.

### In Germany, the telematics or the extra data on my driving behavior and how I brake and how I swerve and how I accelerate, is not providing a low enough price to drive new policies?

Yes. Generally, in Germany, there is also a discussion about data privacy. People are afraid to share their data. They are afraid it could be used in court. When there is an accident, they are afraid that this data could be used to their disadvantage.

### Why can’t it give you a low enough price? If you are analyzing every mile I drive, every brake, why can’t that really decrease the price by 50% or 60%, because you are really personalizing it for me?

It can; there is not very much margin in the prices. If you apply it to all risks, it may work and there are now segments where it is applied. But the average premium, in the German market, for third-party liability, for example, is about €300 to €400. Even 20% is not so significant and if you have to finance an additional gadget, which transfers the data to the insurer, from this discount, it doesn’t pay off. The insurer cannot finance it without a loss. All the data providers want to charge a flat fee for the data they transmit to the insurer.

### The telematics provider charges a fee for the insurer to transmit the data, so the insurer has to pay that fee, plus then offer a cheaper price to the customer? This means the insurer pretty much ends up losing?

Yes. There are some segments which are very, very expensive. Take the young drivers, for example. With the young drivers, you could differentiate with a telematics tariff very easily, because there are some cautious ones. They aren’t just crazy, mainly men, who compete on the roads and try to be the fastest. There are also the nice little girls, who drive very cautiously. Today, this cannot be captured in the tariffs, because we are not allowed to distinguish with respect to gender and there are also no other indicators which are easily applied. The telematics could help enormously. But up to this point, there has been no real push into the market.

### We are seeing these companies, in the US, such as Root Insurance or Metromile, that offer a UBI-based insurance which is specifically targeting millennials, and almost personalizes the policy for your driving habits. Let’s say they only target millennials or 20-year-olds to 30-year-olds; do you think it’s possible that they can really have a price advantage over the big insurers, in the US?

Yes, I think so, if they are able to price exactly. Normally, all traditional insurers struggle with the legacies they have such as the IT systems that are not easily adapted to new data and the handling of the data is quite difficult. I don’t know the US market well enough, but I assume it is pretty similar to all other markets and that the sales organizations don’t support such new approaches very well because it has to be explained and they shy away from it. It is one of the biggest obstacles for all innovations, if you have to convince your agents and your sales partners.

It is easier in the direct insurance segment. If there is acceptance in the direct insurance channel and people are aware of price differences, you are able to succeed.

### Could you elaborate around why the legacy insurers struggle to add new data to their models?

They often have pretty old IT systems or very old IT systems. They were, maybe, the first movers in using IT to administer their portfolios and there are restrictions because nobody knows, anymore, how the system was designed. Sometimes there are even such outdated databases that there is no space for any additional data. It is a patchwork work that was implemented over the last decades and if you touch one part of it, it becomes possible that none of it will work anymore. The motor business communicates in Germany, for example, with many systems outside the insurance company. For example, the registration bureau. This is also the case in many other markets. It is not a complicated system but a complex system.

### For example, let’s say I have my history at Allianz and you have my car model, my region, my age and then you wish to add in my driving behavior, in 2020, and my braking and my accelerating. Is that very difficult to add that to my policy or to my segmentation?

It depends heavily on the company that wants to undertake that change. Normally, just one additional data point is not difficult; that’s doable. It is a question of time and a question of money. There are also models in place – I think Allianz is running such a model – where you have a model that is doing all the pricing and is connected to the actual software so the final rating can be very easily transmitted to the IT system and the administration system. Usually, it is separated in a model which can easily be adapted to the new system.

### How do you look at setting the price of the policy? How do you work out if it is the actuarial price or the technical price? How do you look at the different types of pricing?

Normally, you have the technical price which is a base. The technical price is a price which fits perfectly to the risk and covers all the costs as well, such as expenses, acquisition costs, costs of capital, reinsurance cost and so on. This price is transferred to the commercial price, depending on price sensitivity, if available, or conversion rate, for the profit margin that you are targeting. The price is usually provided by the IT systems and the offer is given to the sales organization or given to the end customer, if it is direct business.

Sometimes there is an additional element where they can be given a discount and then you have an actual price that can differ from the commercial price.

### So you have a risk-based price, a technical price which the actuaries come up with, with the data and the GLM, and then you will look at the competition and the commercial landscape and adapt the price and tweak it slightly?

Yes.

### Then, potentially, even more discounts on top of that to give a final price to the customer?

Yes. It strongly depends on which price strategy you have. There are organizations in the market who love to discount their prices. It is integrated into the commercial price and then the sales organization is allowed to give some discount. There are also companies in the market who have just one price and this has to be applied all the time because they are afraid of anti-selection which is a great issue, especially if you are a direct insurer. It depends heavily on the strategy of the company as to how the commercial price is set and derived, which comes from what the main target you want to achieve is.

### What is the biggest challenge in setting the auto policy price?

From my point of view, it is balancing commercial success versus profit optimization and avoiding anti-selection.

### What is the anti-selection issue?

The anti-selection issue is, if you price very differently from the market and you are very cheap in a certain segment, these segments will insure with you and if you have no profit you will accelerate your losses. There was an example that you can use for all students. In the 90s, when this deregulation in the German market happened, some companies said, we won’t change our prices; we will stick to what we did in the past. They were the ones who had the biggest losses of the whole market because their customers who would have paid higher prices with the new system stayed with them and the others left them. Therefore, the claims exploded and they had really big losses.

### How do you see the pricing of motor insurance evolving over the next 10 years?

I think there are mainly three trends that we have to look at. First of all, we have a disruptive environment. Mobility is changing dramatically due to, firstly, the technological progress; we are approaching autonomous driving. There will be reduction of differences between the different drivers. There will be a different way of using cars. People are no longer so interested in owning a car; there is a sharing economy. I think that’s really one of the most important topics, that this is a disruptive and very uncertain market.

Secondly, we have much data generated by the car which can be used in pricing and which can be used for a very different approach on pricing and may also feed other methodologies. I am convinced that generalized linear models will be substituted by machine learning and methods which can also reflect non-linear dependencies between different criteria. I think those are the most important topics which have an influence on the pricing.

### So the core changes are partly the mobility changes in people not travelling, plus the autonomous side and the next point is the data generated by the car?

Yes. And also the methodology. I think there is, firstly, the behavior and the changes in the technology which enables the behavior in mobility. Secondly, the data and methodologies we have in place and the possibilities we have with machine learning and artificial intelligence, to set up different prices, because we now have the capabilities of IT systems to do so.

### I want to talk about autonomous vehicles and the progress in technology a bit later on, but can we go back to telematics and the data generated and how that feeds into the methodologies. What are the most important parts of data that we can collect from the cars and how are the insurers looking at gathering that data?

I think there are two main aspects to this. Firstly, how is the car driven? There is acceleration, how do you brake, when do you drive, which weather conditions you have, which roads you drive on. The second is the circumstances of the accidents. The first one is used to individualize a price for a customer. The second one is to understand how this individualized data is connected to the claims, to be able to predict and also to be able to steer the claims situation in a better way. If you have the online telematics data you also have access to the car that has to be repaired quickly and you can steer where it is repaired. If you have the data in the car and you know where it was hit by the other car, you can even forecast the kind of damage that you have. That will enable to you forecast even better which repair method will be the appropriate one and you can lower your own claims costs.

### You think that having this in-house telematics system plus the claims process in-house could actually reduce the total cost of insurance for personalized policies for users?

Yes.

### How can the big insurers compete with that? Obviously, they have access to all this data too.

First of all, there are some big insurers cooperating with the automotive industry and they are really exchanging their knowledge, very intensively. Therefore, they have a better understanding of the risks and a better access to the data than the smaller ones. Secondly, if you want to use such a huge amount of data, you need the infrastructure and you have to take care of data security. You cannot just use any cloud; you have to do it properly and that also costs money. The infrastructure is pretty expensive, just to be able to run such a model and, therefore, you need scale. The big insurers have the scale and the access, if they are international insurers to the automotive industry and this is the advantage they have.

### How do they work with the OEMs, in Germany? Do they have partnerships where they pay a certain price for the data? Do they own the data?

This is a discussion that has taken place, very intensively, in Insurance Europe and the discussion is still going on with the European Commission. The insurance industry says that the data has to be steered by the one who drives or owns the car. The automotive industry says that it is their data; we need the data and we have to ringfence it. It is too dangerous; there could be hacking or there could be cyber issues. On the one side, everything protects their own access to the customer and also to the repair process which is the main source of profit for the OEMs. On the other side, the insurers are afraid of being cut off from the customer and just being the second line and providing the risk capital and no longer being the first contact point for the customer.

There is also risk because some insurers have strong relationships with the car makers, especially in Germany, with their car market. For example, there is a very strong joint venture between Volkswagen and Allianz. The new business with Volkswagen is almost not available in the market anymore. The point of sale is really the car dealer. They provide the car, together with the insurance.

### From Allianz?

Yes, from Allianz. It’s a joint venture. They have a separate risk carrier, as far as I know. I don’t know the details.

### So if I go and buy a new Volkswagen, at a car dealership in Germany, can I only get Allianz insurance for that car or is it that they offer me a great deal on that vehicle?

They offer you a great deal. Of course, they cannot force you to take Allianz insurance.

### Are there telematics in there?

At the moment, I don’t think so. I don’t know exactly; I haven’t checked if they now have telematics in place. But as far as I know, they don’t have telematics included. There is often a flat rate included, which is cross-subsidized by the financial part of Volkswagen.

### Do you think that the OEMs will move into owning the data and the telematics? Do you think they are really pushing to own every data point that comes out of the vehicles?

They already have the data. If I had a BMW, if there is an issue, there is a direct connection to a BMW service center, call center, and they guide me to their next garage. They collect the data to forecast when the next servicing is needed. They already have the data.

### Do they even have the braking and accelerating data, as well?

I think they have it. If I buy the car, I have to sign that they are able to use the data. There are also some automotive companies in the market who try to sell their data to the insurance company.

### So the insurer really needs to collect this data. They need to either buy it or get access to it, to be able to start offering a personalized price in the future?

Yes. There are two or three models and there is a discussion with the European Commission about having access to the data. The first one is to get the data directly out of the car, to the insurer, or that it will be stored in a separate server and it can be accessed from there. The automotive industry argues that it is too dangerous if there is access to the data directly in the car and that they will provide set of data in a separate machine, separate place.

### I know that most of the global big insurers, such as Progressive, have their own telematics product; Allianz have a UBI product. How exactly do they work, today? Do they partner with the OEM?

Most of them have a special gadget. You can have a stick that you put into your engine and this transfers data to the insurer.

### Is it a third party that owns the gadget?

Yes; or you use your mobile. The mobile can also measure some information, such as speed and where you are and so on and this data is transferred to the insurers. Nowadays that is the main way it is done. Or there is a kind of black box that is implemented in the car.

### Let’s just walk through how you price the UBI. Let’s say I want to have a usage-based insurance policy so I come to you, at Allianz. You take all my basic data points around age and car type, etc. You would then get me a black box from your third-party telematics provider, put it in my car and I would then drive? Or would my policy be based on just some statistics before I even have the box and would it change after I get the box? How does it work?

There are many models available in the market. In Italy, it was mainly the case that you agree to have the box in your car. You agree that you are watched. That is already an indicator that you are a cautious person. Then there is just a flat discount. This was the first success, in the Italian market, for example, which was also struggling at that time with the theft issue. The black box helped to find the car again. Therefore, there were many different reasons why people agreed to have it in their car. It was just a flat discount of 10% or 15% and the data was mainly used for tracking if the car was stolen.

### So the data from my black box didn’t really personalize my insurance policy, after a year?

I think there were some models in place where they were adapted a little bit but, in the first instance, people want to have a predictable price. Secondly, as you already said, a UBI price. The first thing they use it for is to count the mileage and to have a price depending on mileage.

### How does that work?

The miles are reported and the price is dependent on the miles you drive. It is a pretty common feature in the German market. In other markets, it’s not so common, because the insurers don’t rely on what the customer says and, therefore, it will add value. The more miles you drive, the more risky the policy is.

### In terms of the UBI, let’s say, again, I agree to have a black box and I also agree to have my policy price based on the miles that I drive, would my pricing adapt and change each year, based on my driving behavior or are the big insurers not yet that sophisticated, to keep updating my braking, accelerating, etc.?

Yes, there are already some insurers providing a score on your driving. Generally, this scoring integrates the way you accelerate, where you drive, when you drive, how you brake, how you take turns and so on and gives you one score. This score often comes with some recommendations as to how you could improve your driving, to save fuel, on the one hand, and also to be safer. In this case, this score will be one of the elements of surprise. But you could also start with this element and add other components.

### How granular do you think the pricing is going to get? Let’s say, in 10 years’ time, how do you envisage the price of auto insurance?

This is a really tricky question. It depends strongly on how fast the mobility concept moves into a new world of autonomous driving. If we have autonomous driving in place, we will have totally different pricing mechanisms because the driving skill of the individual cannot influence it anymore.

### That’s clearly a longer-term vision, but if we don’t have autonomous driving and we just have much, much better data, but humans are still driving, do you think everyone will have their own specific, personalized policy or do you think the big insurers can’t move that fast and it will just be some startups that have millennial personalized pricing that do it all on digital or mobile?

I think it will become more and more individualized and the telematics data will be used more intensively. It depends heavily on the market that you are in. If you look at quite conservative markets and passive markets, like Germany, where you have a silent renewal, it will take much more time than in markets where you have to actively renew every year, as a customer, such as the UK. It also depends on how the insurers can access the data.

### It really depends on the insurers making sure that they partner with the OEMs? Or can they build internal telematics or buy a telematics company, to bring that process in-house?

Yes, some of the companies have already done that. They have the knowledge in-house but they need access to the car. This is really a big barrier because a car has to be safe, has to provide a certain integrity of the electronic parts. That is not easy to solve.

### Looking at the step before autonomous vehicles, which is electric cars and Teslas or ADAS and partly autonomous, how do you look at underwriting a policy for a Tesla versus a BMW, for example? Do you treat them differently?

Yes, of course, because a Tesla is more expensive to repair; that is already an experience that we have had. The drivers may also be different, in terms of how they drive their car because they have to be careful how far they go, just to get to the next charging station. Of course, there is a difference between cars that are electronic and those that are not, but it is already captured, mainly in the rating structure, as the car is already one of the criteria for the price.

### Is it more expensive?

Yes, or less expensive, depending on how the car is constructed, who uses the car, who buys the car and, also, how the car needs to be repaired. There are cars that you can repair more easily as well as cars that are more expensive to repair.

### Taking a Tesla, I think there is an interesting trade-off between a Tesla that is pushing the boundaries of becoming safer and preventing accidents, with automatic braking, more sensors and things like that. But then again, it’s very expensive to repair. How do you weigh up that trade-off when you underwrite a policy?

Normally, in your generalized linear models, you use frequency as well as average claim and severity. Those factors will be combined and the result depends on how it balances.

### What has a higher weight, in the model? What are the variables that matter most in the GLM, if you take claim severity versus frequency?

It’s multiplied.

### The factors are just all multiplied together?

Yes; there is no weighting.

### If the accidents drop 20% then it would change a lot of the model?

Yes, it would change a lot of the model. Frequency is the most influential criteria.

### How do you think accident rates will evolve, over the next 10 years?

This year, we have had a drop of 20% in the frequency, because of COVID-19. I expect, in the subsequent years, we may have a slight increase from this level, when the economy starts again or improves. But in general, I expect a continuous decrease, as we have seen over the last decades. Everything is improving. The cars are improving; the attitude of the drivers is improving; the roads are better maintained. There are also policies in the market, from the government, to avoid accidents. I don’t think we will see an increase in accidents. It may flatten a little bit, but that’s all. It will continue to decrease.

### I have seen data and statistics, from the US, and it seems as if the accident rate per mile driven actually increased over the last six or seven years, most likely because of distractive driving and texting or being on the phone. How do you look at the fact that accident rates haven’t fallen as much, as technology has evolved?

Because people are not taking full advantage of the technology involved. With ABS, the anti-blocking system for brakes, one of the first safety gadget technologies, the first effect was that these cars had increased frequency. Why was that? Because drivers relied on the technology; they could go faster and thought they didn’t have to pay so much attention to the traffic, because they had that gadget. All these gadgets often lead to behavior that lowers the attention to traffic. We have already seen these famous accidents where people rely on the automation in Tesla and cause awful accidents because they don’t brake themselves. They try to read a newspaper because they think it is an autonomous which, of course, it isn’t.

### You think, potentially, we are at the equivalent of the ABS stage but, today, for ADAS or more autonomous features, where people are just relying too much on technology and the technology is not good enough, just yet, to really make the frequency decline?

Yes. Trusting the technology if everybody has the technology, may work. But we have a variety of cars and vehicles on the road. There are many vehicles on the road – even from the 90s and last century – that don’t have these new technologies.

### So why do you think the accident frequency could decline, if we still have lots of old vehicles and people relying on technology too much?

Because it is progressing and people are getting used to it and making the best out of it. There is an effect, but the effect is not as striking, because you also need to take the human factor into account. As people get used to it, use it correctly and don’t misinterpret it anymore, it will improve. There are also many initiatives to reduce accidents. For example, in the European or German context, there are initiatives to improve the quality of the streets, to change the way the roads intersect, looking for specific spots where many accidents happen and trying to change the layout and the way traffic moves, just to avoid accidents.

### What about distracted driving and people using their mobile phones? Are the OEMs or insurers looking to do anything about that, to prevent frequency increasing too much?

I don’t think that is a topic that can be easily tackled by the insurer, because you cannot look into the car. You can just provide information and warn your clients. It is something that society, as a whole, has to take care of.

### Are the OEMs addressing the issue of people using their phones and being distracted?

For example, in the high-level cars, it is possible to connect to the car, with your phone and to watch videos. This will not work if the car is driving and moving. There are always trials looking at how to prevent misuse of this technology. In the end, it is an individual decision.

### Let’s play this forward 10 years and assume that the frequency is 20% lower. How does this impact the insurance industry?

In the short run, it will improve profit. In the long run, it will endanger the insurance industry. First of all, the customer won’t need insurance as they did in the past, because there are fewer accidents; they are no longer aware that there is a risk. Secondly, fewer claims mean lower prices and, therefore, lower volume to cover the costs. Thirdly, one of the most important factors, there will be a shift in the claims volume towards large losses. Not necessarily more large losses, but there will be a huge reduction in the number of small losses and the large losses will dominate the portfolios and, therefore, we will have a higher volatility which needs more capital. There will be a shifting of the portfolio towards a more risky profile.

### Over the next years, because the frequency will be lower, will the pricing of premiums have to come down, as well?

Yes, it will come down. There will be the adverse tendency of the increasing severity but I don’t expect this to balance out the shrinking frequency.

### Why is that? When you look at the evolution of the price, is it mainly down to the severity and the frequency?

I don’t think the cars are the main topic. The main topic is, in fact, bodily injury. In the future, that will be the dominating type of claim we have to pay out, as an insurance industry. I expect a move towards a trend where car repairing will be covered, together with the OEMs, and it will be kind of maintenance which is included in leasing rates and so on. On the other hand, third-party claims, especially bodily injury, will stay with the insurer.

### You think the OEMs are going to start taking over the repair and its claim?

Yes.

### They will become an insurer, to a certain extent?

Yes; they do that partly, already. Or they will partner with an insurer.

### They will have the telematics and so they will understand the driving habits and the property damage potential?

Yes; and these damages will reduce and reduce.

### Because the frequency is lower and the cars crash less severely?

Yes.

### This puts the insurers in a tricky position, then, in 10 years’ time. It’s really about the data and understanding driving habits but the OEMs are now also encroaching on the data and owning the repair side of things?

There is a third risk, perhaps not just the OEMs. At the moment, they are struggling with many issues. Perhaps they won’t enter this market, but there is room for startups. The insurance industry is pretty expensive; the administration costs are pretty high. The acquisition costs are pretty high. The digital giants could also enter into this market and try to make use of their superior knowledge of data and how to handle data. Think of telecommunication companies who have already much data because people are always carrying their mobile phones; they know a lot about the people.

### I saw a recent release from General Motors and they have their OnStar telematics products and they are actually launching an insurance agency to provide insurance, via the telematics solution that they have.

Yes, they are.

### That makes it interesting for the big insurers. They could be somewhat disintermediated, on the low end, by the startups that are going directly to millennials with better data, better price. And for the OEMs, because they are being disrupted by Uber and Lyft and the ride-hailing companies and nobody wanting to own cars anymore, they’re going to have to earn their margin and profit somewhere else, which is likely selling data from the vehicles?

I think you are touching on an aspect which is really very important. We don’t know how mobility will evolve and which concept of mobility will be the one that we are in, in 10 years. There is also the risk of strong disruption. Look at the carbon issue. It may be that from one year to the next, we are forced to stop certain types of cars or we will pay huge taxes on fuel that is not carbon free. Therefore, these disruptions of the mobility system and all the new ecosystems appearing there, could disrupt motor insurance dramatically.

### What are you really worried about for the big insurance companies?

Becoming irrelevant; no more access to the customers because the customers don’t buy cars anymore and no longer insure cars separately.

### Which company do you think is in the best position to evolve, in Europe?

In Europe, I think the companies that are partnering with OEMs are well-prepared. Also, companies that are low-cost companies. They have low expenses because they can offer a competitive price. You need certain scale to be able to invest and to have the right digital solutions in place.

### Are the companies really worried about this or are they blind to the potential disruption?

I don’t think anybody is blind. They can already see that, in their new business. For example, most of the new business with Volkswagen is now done with joint venture of Volkswagen and Allianz.

### Is that lower margin or not profitable, for Allianz?

I don’t know; I would be guessing. I know that there was not always a positive result on that, but they have worked to really partner and, therefore, I assume they wouldn’t continue without a certain margin which would build the profit expectations of Allianz.

### What you are saying is, this is an example of the OEMs coming into the market and taking more share?

Yes. All the insurance companies observe their claims and how this is handled and there is a strong discussion, in the market, regarding the data and access to data in all markets, in Europe at least. For example, in the German market, the German insurers, via GDV, a German association, developed a gadget as an answer to the eCall, which is provided by the OEMs, for the used cars. This enables them to have access to the data in used cars and to have some stakes in the process and to be listened to in the political discussion.

### My last question, Monika, is around how you think this is going to shake out? What do you think the situation of the industry is going to be in 10 years’ time? I think you already mentioned that the OEMs are going to enter and take more of the property damage and repair side and the insurers, potentially, will keep most of the bodily injury and third-party insurance. Is that how you see this evolving?

I think we will have more specialized insurance companies. There will be a part who focuses on services around motor insurance and tries to have access to the customer directly and to protect the customer with their sales agents or with these additional services against all kinds of competitors, not just insurance companies. There will be companies who partner with the big automotive companies and corporates and try to stay in the market that way. There will also be, perhaps, the new models, new mobility concepts, where the car is just one aspect and the insurance companies providing insurance covers for the whole process. For example, for the travel from home to the office or to a villa in Italy where you spend your holidays.

I imagine that it will be pretty different. The core of the insurance cover, the third-party liability to protect the victims, the bodily injured, will stay. But the question is, it will always be part of the car sold, but will it be paid by the one who is providing, for example, a car for just 10km; is it a shared car or is it a person who really owns the car?

### Monika, this has been fascinating.

It’s changing so much; it’s so disruptive. I have now been in the industry for 25 years and, to be honest, it hasn’t changed that much. The processes were digitalized; we are listening more to the customer. But frankly, the customer is not interested in insurance and we have refined our pricing mechanism but it is always this kind of risk that we have taken. In the future, I think it will really be very different because of these three trends: digitalization, technological progress regarding cars and the third one is climate change and the impact of that on our daily lives. Mobility will change. There will be new mobility concepts and ecosystems that, perhaps, we cannot imagine today. That can happen very fast, if the governments make a decision.