# Productive Paranoia

Jim Collins describes successful leaders as being "paranoid, neurotic freaks". Although paranoia can be debilitating for most people, intelligent use their paranoia to prepare for financial or competitive disruption. They are also able to promote this productive paranoia within their company culture, so the company can maintain itself by innovating and preparing for the worst. Productive paranoia is not simply worrying about the competition; it's doing something about the competition.

Where does the competition come from? Successful leaders fear impermanence through any kind of disruption. Amazon operates in the highly competitive retailing industry, and Jeff Bezos is in "a race to embed the company into the fabric of worldwide commerce in a way that would make it indispensable to everyone's shopping habits - and to do so before rivals wise up to its plans". Every management action revolves around this paranoia. Bezos does not worry about showing depressed short-term earnings due to investing heavily into innovation, because he is preparing to be many steps ahead of the competition.

John Patterson was paranoid about innovation and was famous for his paranoia about financial catastrophes. He could be found checking the price of pig iron, trying to forecast when the next market collapse would occur. National Cash Register salesmen were continuously taught to bridge market collapses by working harder than ever, and Patterson's men were tested during the panic of 1893. NCR not only was prepared but also sold a record number of registers during the panic. 

In the spirit of Patterson, Herb Kelleher at Southwest was famously quoted as saying he had predicted eleven out of the three last recessions. To prepare for these recessions, Southwest always had a solid, conservative balance sheet,to weather every financial storm. Similarly, Ken Iverson ran a cyclical, capital intensive business and benefited from a conservative balance sheet. Kelleher's and Iverson's paranoia enabled both companies to post streaks of profitability unheard of in their industries.

At QuikTrip, Chester Cadieux was never satisfied. He originally stumbled in running his convenience store business, but he continually learned and improved the business. The company continues to harbor a productive paranoia by hiring only employees who are never satisfied. Chet Cadieux, QuikTrip's current CEO, seeks to hire whiners. Laszlo Bock, Google's head of People Operations, has created a team of dissenters at Google, called the "canaries"m who have been described as the biggest complainers, and he has become the company's strongest advocate. The famous hedge fund Bridgewater too, is made up of complainers. Through these dissenters, each company has a much better chance of continuing the successful customer service experience an of raising the bar well into the future.

Bernard Marcus, the co-founder of [[The Home Depot]], describes how productively paranoid Sam Walton was at [[Walmart]], and how most complacent CEOs act:

> But if you ask Sam how's business, he's never satisfied. He says "Bernie, things are really lousy. Our lines are too long at the cash registers. Our people aren't being helpful enough. I don't know what we're gonna do to get them motivated." Then you ask some of these CEOs from other retail organizations who you know are on the verge of out of business, and they brag and tell you how great everything is.

Customer service and product creation/offering is another area where our intelligent fanatic CEOs showed fanaticism. Of course, without the best, continuous customer experience, the companies would not be able to compete. But Simon Marks, for instance, also was paranoid about the quality of the merchandise he sold, and when the *Financial Times* noted Marks & Spencer's efficient management, Marks responded "We were never satisfied."

On one occasion, Simon Marks was at the head office toy-buying department. There, he met Marks & Spencer's merchandiser, who was proud to have successfully negotiated with a manufacturer to lower the price of a toy car by one shilling. Simon quickly noticed that the base plate for the car was missing and stated "Last year, this car had a base plate. Now there is only a body shell and four wheels." The merchandiser explained that this change was how he was able to get the price lowered. Simon tossed the toy on the man's desk and said bluntly, "I imagine, young man, if we take the wheels off as well, we can get the price down to 1s 11d." The model then appeared on shelves, base plate and all, at the lower price, and the employee never forgot that lesson.

Les Schwab was paranoid about not giving his current and future employees the best opportunities to succeed both personally and financially. This paranoia led him to continually tweak the company's incentive system as the company grew. His main goal was to create a self-sustaining entity that would outlast him, many years after his departure, and would provide opportunities for many young people in the future.

After 1989, Anheuser Busch InBev has been led by productive, paranoid leaders, and with a culture promotes a never-satisfied mentality. According to AB Inbev's 2014 annual shareholder reports:

> Yet our culture is one of never being completely satisfied with our results, and we are always looking to do better. We are operating in a rapidly shifting environment where volatility and uncertainty are here to stay, and where consumer trends and habits are changing at an ever accelerating pace. We must therefore be nimble and quick to anticipate new tastes, demands and behaviors, by nurturing a start-up mentality despite being a top-five consumer goods company. We must promote out-of-the-box thinking to bring consumers what they truly want today, tomorrow and in the future. 
