# Rationality Mechanisms in an Industry

Understanding the potential consequences of disruptions in a given industry is an important step in the process of assessing its attractiveness. In many industries, market share battles and small price wars will occasionally erupt.  We try to assess whether these eruptions are likely to create all-out war, destroying industry profitability, or be resolved amicably. Given the inevitable risk of any company behaving destructively, one should prefer companies in industries with the ability to snap back to rationality and stability. 

The best industries are those where all companies can afford to think long-term. If an industry's technology, demand and participants will remain constant, it reduces the incentive to attempt to increase earnings on the short run at the expense of the long.  These kind of effects tend to be more powerful if key industry players are family-owned. While CEOs may have a three to five years perspective on a company, families think in generations. While bursts of irrationality undoubtly arise in family businesses, they tend to be more contained.

It also helps when the payoff from aggression is deferred. Take the case of partial monopolies, where upfront sales generate long-term monopolistic profit streams. When the cost of slashing prices today will take years to recover through future monopoly profits, rivals have less incentives for doing so. Similarly, it is advantageous if companies have a way to hit back at competitors through a [[Tit for Tat]] strategy: this is one reason pricing remains relatively rational in many parts of the household goods industry.

Disruptions to the marketplace can be long-lived and damaging levels of market share. This is particularly an issue in industries where scale is important to success. When players in an industry see losing share as as systemic risk, aggressive pricing may seem rational, despite the damage it can do to overall industry economics.

While customers are quick to embrace price cuts, they fight back price increases. It can take years for the impact of price wars to diminish. The real danger from poor pricing discipline is when it changes customer behavior or expectations. With branded products, discounting is the most common way to do this.

Discounting can be seductive in the short term: it boosts sales, enables companies to hit their profit targets, and even brings gains in market share. But it is dangerously addictive. When companies see that it works once, they are often tempted to do it again. Competitors typically follow suit to protect market share and the industry starts teaching customers to expect persistent discounting. Once that occurs, the industry has trapped itself.

Such behavior eroded profitability in the laundry detergent category. Having taught consumers to buy in bulk on sale is also one of the reasons why Coca Cola struggles with profitability in North America. The investor should appreciate a company policy to avoid discounts, as this is a sign of a genuinely long term view as opposed to seeking artificial short term boosts that risk long term performance. LVMH's Moët & Chandon, for instance, did not discount its champagne during the global financial crisis that began in 2008, despite a sharp contraction in demand. Instead, the company sold at full price when the good times returned. 


See [[Rationality]], [[Games Theory]]