> The difference between a good business and a bad business is that good businesses throw up one easy decision after another. Bad businesses throw up painful decisions time after time. 
— Charlie Munger


For an increase in earnings to be evaluated properly, it should always be compared with the incremental capital investment required to produce it.

Great businesses are the ones with an ever-increasing stream of earnings with virtually no major capital requirements, and they produce extraordinarily high returns on incremental invested capital. These businesses sometimes earn infinitely high return on capital as they require little tangible capital to grow and are driven by intangible assets such as a strong brand name with "share of mind", intellectual property, or proprietary technology. Great businesses are typically characterized by negative working capital, very low fixed asset intensity, and "real" [[Pricing Power]].

Negative [[Costs of Working Capital| working capital]] means that the customers are paying the company cash up front for goods or services that will be delivered at a later date. This is a powerful catalyst for a growing company, as the customers are essentially financing the company's growth through pre-payments. Best of all, the interest rate of this financing is 0%. Tough to beat. It is common to see negative working capital in subscription businesses where customers pay upfront for recurring service or access. Because revenue is recognized when the service is performed, which is after the cash comes in, these businesses typically have operating cash flows that exceeds net income.

Low fixed asset intensity can be analyzed by comparing annual sales to net property, plant and equipment, and/or capital expenditures. In the franchisor business model, the franchisor collects a royalty from franchisee in exchange for the use of the brand name, business plan, and other proprietary assets. The overall system grows as franchisees supply the capital to build new locations, enabling the franchisor to grow revenue and earnings without deploying additional capital. It is a great business model if it can be scaled up, because it is capital-light and throws off lots of free cash flow by simply leveraging the brand-name equity of the franchisor. This is why Buffett has said: "the best business is a royalty on the growth of others, requiring little capital itself." Firms that outsource their core manufacturing activities while focusing on design, marketing, and branding efforts also have low fixed assets intensity.

Finally, if the business provides a product or service that is differentiated, has high switching costs, and/or is critical to customers (while constituting a minuscule percentage of all costs), it may be able to consistently raise prices at level *exceeding* inflation. This is the simplest way to grow earnings without additional capital, because the flow-through margins on price increases are usually very high. Companies such as Bloomberg and See's Candies have long histories of raising prices at or above inflationary rates, and Buffett considers this to be one of the most important variables when analyzing a business: "*The single most important decision in evaluating a business is pricing power*. If you've got the power to raise prices without losing business to a competitor, you've got a very good business."
