 # Risk Management

 Most corporate leaders are comfortable focusing on growth and profitability. That's what Wall Street uses to value companies and what the compensation for those leaders is normally geared toward. There are nuances in how to define those metrics, like cash flow versus profits or margins versus return on capital. But in the end, compensation schemes need to be tailored to the challenges of that particular entity. Differentiation is often less dynamic than you would expect. Where we find few best practices, however, is around risk management and risk control. Leaders are often free to pursue strategies that offer sharply different risk profiles overall.

 Ironically, professional investors tend to understand risk better than many of the management teams of the companies they invest in. Professional investors tend to have a "maximize gain while minimizing loss" mindset that identifies potential risks and expects to be compensated for them. This is a fundamental value driver that underpins the structure of almost everything in the finance world, and it's perhaps easiest to observe in bond ratings, where risk levels are assessed and assigned before securities are even sold. It's directly seen in stock valuations when you compare more predictable revenue models, like software, with less predictable ones, like financial services. There's a similar dynamic when you compare cyclical assets with less cyclical. The valuation differences relate completely to risk perceptions.

 Inside many companies, especially once you get a few layers down into the organization, there's little such appreciation for risk. And incentive compensation systems often ignore risk entirely. Even in some otherwise well-managed firms, people are paid to boost revenues and earnings to maximize cash flows, but these people aren't guided on how much risk to take when doing so. The result is a tendency toward risky decisions, especially when the potential consequences of those risks are well in the future and therefore another leader's responsibility.

 To achieve both growth and profits, both of which are outputs, businesses must contribute various inputs, and not all inputs are created equal. Some come with contingent costs, and others have timing consequences that skew evaluations of costs and benefits. In our experience,, the most successful companies are consistently mindful of the inputs that best drive their desired outputs, and they find ways to limit the use of risky inputs. The outcome of this mindfulness is higher-quality growth, or returns that are less volatile and more sustainable over the long term.

 Risk management is therefore a critical variable in our long-term analysis of success versus failure. And although investors are pretty good at discounting different risk profiles, companies are often very much asleep at the wheel. GE's near failure twice in a decade relates specifically to its failure to manage risks on more levels than we can even count: project risk, M&A risk, high debt levels, pension funding risk, cultural degradation risk, underinvestment risk, and the actuarial risk it retained with long-term-care insurance liabilities. Nearly every failure that we can identify has some element of an altered risk profile that went very badly, whether an ill-conceived M&A deal, or poorly made investments, or bad leadership allowed to linger far longer than warranted. Management flaws relating to risk control begin to show even in good economies but become particularly pronounced in recessions.