
Ryanair started flying between London's Gatwick airport and Waterford, Ireland's fifth largest city, in 1985 with a single turboprop plane. Initially focused on the London/Ireland flight market, historically dominated by Aer Lingus and British Airways, the company spent the next 30 years  muscling into markets across Europe route-by-route. Ryanair now operates 1600 daily flights from 72 hubs, carrying more than 90 millions passengers annually. 

The bedrock of Ryanair's spectacular growth is being the lowest-cost provider - by a wide margin - in a legendarily inefficient and uneconomic industry (see [[Airline Business]]). Ryanair exemplifies the benefits of substantial cost advantage: aside from fuel, Ryanair's unit cost is around half of its closest competitor, EasyJet and far less than half of other rivals such as Norwegian and Air Berlin. Competitors must price fares at double Ryanair's rates, which explains why it continues to take market share across Europe.

Ryanair's low-cost strategy rests on extreme operating efficiency. Its greatest cost advantage is airport landing fees. Ryanair is traditionally operated from smaller airports where it dominated airport owners, rather than the usual industry position of subservience. As a result, even when primary airports raise fees, Ryanair gets concessions. Its second biggest cost advantage is shrewd fleet acquisition. While other airlines, driven by pilot-focused cultures, prioritize diverse fleets of fancy aircrafts, Ryanair built a uniform fleet opportunistically. In 2003, for example, amid an industry slump, it made a massive purchase of high quality Boeing 737-800s on the cheap. The bulk purchasing strategy also yields volume rebates from manufacturers and facilitates staffing an in-house maintenance crew, which is vastly cheaper than alternatives.

These two cost advantages are mutually-reinforcing, driving a deep and strengthening competitive advantage. The inexpensive planes allow Ryanair to fly profitably at low fares to small airports. Ryanair comes to dominate traffic at these airports and translates this dominance into significantly lower landing fees. A recent order to double its fleet over the next eight years will ensure continuity, perhaps acceleration, of these dynamics, as no other airline is growing as fast as Ryanair.

Ryanair is renowned for rethinking traditional aspects of European aviation and relentlessly finding ways to cut costs. Its ideas are often controversial, but rivals invariably follow suit to catch up on the savings. Examples on the long list are: charging for food and beverages; charging for luggage and airport check-in; discarding frequent-flier programs; and not using air bridges. Such bold moves also generate publicity, much of it critical, but this is then a cheap way to catch the attention of interested customers. As CEO Michael O'Leary explained:

> As long as you run around generating noise... it drives people on to our website. And we don't spend  hundreds of millions of dollars on marketing companies to do it... Charging for toilets continues to be the number one story that resurfaces in the press and it's the gift that keeps on giving. We've never done it, but it keeps coming up on social networks every three or four months, the media picks up on it and then someone writes a story on it.

Epitomizing the pattern of [[Low Price Plus]],  Ryanair continually leverages its competitive advantages. Of late it has used the profitability and leanness of its cost-consciousness to obtain aircraft acquisition financing at vastly lower rates than rivals, who must pay more due to costly structural burdens such as pension benefits. Similarly, Ryanair has begun  to encroach into primary airports and business travel, to an extent replacing Europe's retrenching legacy carriers. Ryanair's cultural embrace of low-cost operation yields margins and returns on capital unrivaled in the industry. It boasts steady and substantial earnings growth with earnings tripling over the past decade.