# Sanjay Ayer - Think different, get better

Source: [Far from the Post Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/sanjay-ayer-wcm-think-different-get-better/id1561196896?i=1000545497549)

See also [[Mike Trigg - Defying the fade at WCM]], [[Paul Black on Moat Direction]], [[Paul Black on creating a winning culture]]


**Troy :** The idea that investors should focus more on the direction the company is traveling in rather the size of its competitive moat is a compelling one, but how do you look for inflection points, and how does your framework allow you to identify companies that have reached their peak and are now in decline? And also, how do you identify companies that are early on their journey? Maybe we can analyze this subject through the lens of Amazon and Shopify, since you used to own Amazon, and Shopify you have owned for several years.

**Sanjay :** So our framework is two-fold: one is that a competitive advantage is not static, and if you accept that the direction of the competitive advantage is what drives stock returns. And so our playbook is to find companies who are growing their moats, and if we're not longer convinced that the moat is growing we will move on. The bar is really high. If we think that the moat is flattening, that would be a reason enough for us to move on. A lot of it is rooted in pattern recognition, we are big believers that history may not repeat itself exactly but it tends to rhyme. And by studying history you start to see common patterns for how moats evolve and how moats peak over time. It is most extreme in technology, because you have rapid lifecycles, and if you wanna talk about Amazon versus Shopify, Amazon is still a phenomenal business, more entrenched than ever, but when we think about how is the moat and can it grow from here, it is a bit more challenging. They will continue to push things like logistics, they will continue to grow AWS, but are they more powerful relative to the rest of e-commerce and web services or is that starting to peter out?  

I think you can have a reasonable debate about that, but for us we think that moat growth will be more difficult to have going forward than in the past. And for us, when we invest in what we call secular growth companies, we'd like to catch things, call it in the third inning and go into the seventh inning, and we'd say Amazon is probably toward the latter end of that. 

When you look at Shopify, It's the opposite. This is a company, at least when we bought it, that was still relatively unknown, there was a lot of debate about do they have a moat, there are lots of companies out there that are powerful in e-commerce websites, it's a competitive landscape, it is a low-quality customer base, there is quite some churn. So there was a lot of debate around the name, and there still is to some extent. But that's an example of company whose moat was not fully in evidence four of five years ago, because it was viewed as a point software solution. And our view it was evolving from a point solution to an operating system. And we think that has been playing out as we speak. 

**Troy :** Sanjay, how do you go about testing the trajectory of a moat? In the case of Shopify or any other example you'd like to mention, cause these are often very subjective things. First of all, figuring out what the moat is, and then measuring it, figuring out if it is expanding or shrinking? What is the process to measure the trajectory of a moat over time?

**Sanjay :** Sure that's a great question. I will start by defining quantitatively how we go about defining moat trajectory. And it's really two-fold. One is figuring out the durability of revenue growth, it is not about the level of revenue growth, we are agnostic about that. But how durable is it. Two is the return on invested capital trajectory. So we care about the trajectory of the returns rather than the absolute number. And companies tend to be undervalued based on these criteria. Markets tend to extrapolate a fade. Revenue growth of a company fade to GDP growth over time, and the return on invested capital fade to cost of capital. And by large they are appropriate assumptions for most companies. But we think that some great companies can defy that fade of revenue growth and return on invested capital. How we evaluate it over time, it's an art. It's not a science, it depends on the type of company. In the case of Shopify, which is a platform company, we really focus on "are they creating value for their customers faster than they participate in the economics of that value?" 
I would say, when you think about platform durability for multiple counterparties, it's about maintaining win-win relationships, as Peter Kaufman puts it, win-win relationships with all your counterparties. And so you can think of Shopify's pricing or take-rate relative to the value customers are getting, and we think that the company is solving pain points for merchants and customers faster than they are increasing their take rate. And the best way to measure that is to talk to counterparties. If you talk to suppliers, they'll say "look, Shopify can raise my prices by 20% tomorrow, and I'll be totally fine with that. Cause they are adding more and more value each year, without charging much for that." If this starts to tip and they say, "Look, Shopify is jacking up its prices without adding incremental value", that's one flag for a platform business. Maybe their moat is starting to peter out. 

**Troy :** And thinking about Amazon, was it a similar situation? Was the value equation going against their counterparties? Was it no longer compelling in terms of the trajectory of the moat? Or was it also that the likes of Shopify were democratizing a lot of what Amazon had built for smaller merchants?

**Sanjay :** I think those two points are related. What Amazon was doing as far as its policy towards merchants, regulators, communities had opened up a vacuum in the market for a company like Shopify to emerge. It was merchant-focused, it had a differentiated view about commerce, they were really trying to fuel entrepreneurship. And if Amazon had not taken that stance towards merchants, or at least create that perception that they were increasingly favoring the consumer at the expense of the merchant with things like private label, what they were doing with take rates, or their actions during covid - which were all appropriate for Amazon by the way. They all focus on can they deliver faster goods cheaper and with increasing selection, which is their model. But it shows you there are tensions with that model regarding serving multiple counterparties. And ultimately you have to choose.

When you are thinking about Shopify over the next five years or maybe the next decade, that's something you have to think about. They have been in a good position in some way to only be focusing on the merchants. There might be expectations over time that they may do more in terms of consumer offerings. And so you need to have conviction as an investor that they are going to continue to do that. And if they do that, will they do that in a sensible way that does not create too much tension and slow down decision making, and favor one counterparty over the other, which could create problems on the road.

**Troy :** Sanjay, we just talked about win-win scenarios for platform companies like Shopify, but what are the other attributes or characteristics you look for to give you confidence in the durability of companies' competitive advantages? I am thinking particularly about what you call moat typologies.

**Sanjay :** If you look at investing, by and large, most of the big decisions manifest themselves in two judgment calls. One, if a company doing well, you have to ask yourself if it is durable? And then two, if a company is not doing well, you have to ask yourself, is it temporary or structural? As an investment management firm, you can build a firm around finding great analysts who are brilliant, looking at information and just making those calls better than everyone else on average. You can do well based on that. I think that's a difficult strategy to sustain over the long run, because there are challenges that come in different flavours, so I think the odds of sustaining good results with that strategy are low, it is difficult and it becomes more and more difficult as you extend your timeframe. 

So what we try to do is to complement our analysts with what we call compounding knowledge. This is knowledge bases that are foundational and apply across both those judgment calls. So we think if you can build compounding knowledge to support these judgment calls, your batting average can structurally go up, which increases the likelihood you can sustain that success over decades. One of these fields of compounding knowledge is what we call moat typologies, and it is a framework for how to think about moats. 

So for example, Taiwan Semi-conductors. It is a company we've owned for 17 years now. I think everyone knows TSMC, it is a contract manufacturer for semiconductor companies. There have been no shortage of reasons to sell TSMC over the course of seventeen years. Whether you talk about semiconductor cycles, whether you talk about competition from the likes of Samsung global foundry, whether you talk about maturing end markets, TSCM business mix that used to be desktop, mobile, now it is AI and data centers. So it has changed quite a bit. And over the course of all these years it would have been very easy to say "you know, the moat is flattening up, the story has peaked, let's move on". 

What has given us confidence to hold that name over the course of that timeframe is twofold. One is its moat typology, this is an outsourced service R&D company. And we had done a lot of case studies historically on outsourced service companies. We have a good framework knowing whether those companies can continue to grow their moat, and one key element we look for is, can they climb the value chain? And evolve from an outsourced manufacturer to an outsourced R&D partner. TSMC, historically, it was not a really great business when it was born. Capital intensive. Customer concentration. Would not score well on the Porter Five Forces. But you look at how it has evolved and how it has climbed the value chain. Having a knowledge base that this is an outsourced R&D company, and knowing the variables we look for has really informed and helped us to hold over all these kind of events over the course of that time frame. 

The second, and it goes to the point of longevity, is [[Corporate culture]]. Complementing that micro work we do with this body of work around the culture. If you can grow your conviction around the company's culture, you can apply that time and again over all those "issues" that come out. When we looked at TSMC's culture, we had a high level of conviction that they fit our framework.

**Troy :** You're clearly trying to get at the essence and DNA of successful and durable businesses. But other than that, are there any false positives? How many times do you confuse noise for signal?

**Sanjay :** Great question. At WCM we are many thing, but we proud ourselves most in being a learning culture. Post mortem, case studies. We do a post-mortem with all our decisions. We are actually in the process of building a mobile app that will kind of supercharge that hopefully.

We have made lots of mistakes. We try to learn from them. One of the mistakes through our moat typology is getting too naive in hindsight about geographical patterns. At a high level you could say apply a developed market mental model to emerging markets. So looking how retailers have evolved, globally, developing our typology around that, and then say I'd like to find the Walmart of China, in the second inning. And then we did an investment in China, that turned out to be a mistake because e-commerce leapfrogged brick and mortar shortly after our purchase. 

We've made mistakes in Latine America as well. Blindly applying patterns geographically was an early lesson that some geographies work differently, especially when you are dealing with technology. Emerging markets are developing faster than developed markets. So that was one. 

Another one was consumer staples. Our biggest overweight relative to the index used to be consumer staples, which did very well when these moats were growing when they were moving to emerging markets. In this new world where there are lots of brands, maybe the barriers to entry are lower to beat, we've had to recalibrate how we think about consumer staples, consumer brands to accommodate this new environment. 

We are not too rigid about any of these. If you try to fit anything into a moat framework, you are going to get too rigid and make mistakes. We think they are guiding principles that help us to think through periods of noise. 

**Troy :** Sanjay, I think there are a lots of moat typologies. I'd be interested if you think there are one or two you think are misunderstood, or chronically underrated by other investors. 

**Sanjay Ayer :** One of our favorite is niche industrial typology. These are companies that operate in niche end markets. They have high market share. There tends to be a high cost of failure if something goes wrong. Yet their product are low percentage of their customer budget. There tends to be a complicated road to market, an engineer-to-engineer sale. So customers tend to be not so price sensitive. 

As you could imagine, we find niche industrial companies very often in the industrial sector. But the beauty of these typologies is that they can span across sectors. So we are increasingly finding great niche industrial businesses in the healthcare space. When you look at West Pharmaceuticals, they are a pharmaceutical packaging company, and I can talk later about the investment case. But although it's classified as a healthcare company, at its core it's an industrial company when you think about it. When you fit it through the niche industrial framework, it actually scores really high, for all the reasons I mentioned, plus a regulatory environment that is critical to the thesis. So it's a great to take a typology that was built for one use case, here the niche industrial company, and now applying it into healthcare. 
I'd say we have three or four investments that hit that frame.

Another typology which we love is this influencer typology. And this is when there is a middle man between the customer and the supplier. And the middle man is really making the decision. You can find it in a lot of cases, you find it in industrials. So for example in the case of the painting business, when you are remodelling a house, you need to select paint. And it is rare that the consumer is really passionate about some paint brand. He is not going to tell the contractor, the painter, "you have to use this brand". He is the expert, you are going to defer to their judgment on that. That decision for the painter is really depending on that relationship they have with the paint provider. And it's not really about price, because they can pass the price to the consumer, and the consumer paint price is not split out in the remodel price.  It is a small percentage of it. So the consumer is not going to push back on price. 

So it tends to be a really relationship-driven business, it is about who can provide the best service to the painter. And so maybe at the core what looks like a commodity service, paint, should really be a commodity chemical, low margins, highly competitive business, tend to be quite a good business. Especially for companies like Sherwin Williams. They have an exceptionally strong service-driven culture that's designed through a retail network they have built to provide best-in-class service. And really, in nature, it is about labor throughput, productivity. It's not about price, it is about how many jobs can I get done. It is about delivering the right paint, at the right time, to the right place. 

And so that's a great example of the influencer typology. We see it in paint, we see it in toilets, believe it or not, we see it in infant formula. Their business model is, if someone told you what they did, you'd be like "it does not sound like a great business". But because there is this interesting middleman dynamic, an asymmetric information, there tends to be not too much price sensitivity. (see also [[The Friendly Middleman]]). Those tends to be very good businesses. 

**Troy :** For those businesses to work well, and for the moat to expand, there is sort of an unwritten contract of trust between the customer and the influencer. And so what distinguishes those businesses is corporate culture, a culture to do right by the customer. Is this the right way to see it? And this is where your moat typology and your trajectory of your moat and corporate culture come together. 

**Sanjay :** Absolutely. You hit the nail on the head. And the biggest risk for an influencer business model, is that the influencer loses its credibility or his staying power. There is some level of disintermediation or disruption that happens. And if there is an element of losing your trust, that would be our biggest red flag for us. It is all about trust. And so companies like Sherwin Williams, if you look at their corporate culture, it is all about helping the customer. As the CEO says: there are two types of employees at Sherwin Williams. There is people that sell paints, and there is people who help people to sell paint. And their whole culture, it is almost like Costco. It is a very service-driven culture. So if there is a sign that it's being lost, that's being eroded, for whatever reason, maybe they are getting too agressive with prices and customers are starting to notice, maybe their service level is slipping. Maybe the incentives are getting questioned. That would be a trigger for us to do a cultural refresh on the company.

**Troy :** Sanjay, digging deeper into corporate culture, I'd like to understand a bit better why you place so much importance on it. How culture can make companies' competitive advantage stronger, and so perhaps why don't other investors focus on it as much as you do?

**Sanjay :** The last question is the easiest. It's hard to do. Especially if you have grown up with a quantitative lens of the world. But more than that, there is this notion of what is called the halo effect, which is that who is to say that a company has a great culture? They could just be at the right place at the right time. And when you interview employees of companies that are at the right place at the right time, they will describe their culture in very glowing terms. But there is a causality there: the performance is causing the description of the culture, and once the performance slips, the description of the culture will slip. So culture being soft, not quantifiable and this notion of a halo effect makes it very challenging to evaluate culture. And it is still challenging for us, as a team in Laguna Beach, to know the culture of a neo bank in Latine America. But I've think we've come a long way, but we are still in the very early innings. 

What personally pushed me over in culture, I've made a number of mistakes picking the number two player in an industry, saying "if they can only close the gap with the number one player". It's like Expedia vs Booking.com,  Advanced Auto Parts vs O'Riley, etc. If you look at their financials, there is a six hundred basis point margin gap. And you say if they can just copy what the number one is doing and do this and this, they'll close that gap, and there is a lot of valuation arbitrage to be had. And you just realize, by studying a bunch of those pairs if you will, that over the long term that gap is structural. And the business model is identical. So the only way to explain that is culture. 

The other thing that tipped me over was auditing my investment thesis. Especially with kind of the more innovative tech companies. You'd see that a lot of times the stock would do well, but for reasons that you did not model in by any means in the original thesis. And it kind of shows there is option value around innovative culture. They will push that revenue growth curve out in ways that you can't predict. 

So we've been on this journey of what defines a healthy culture. And this is not a one size fits all checklist that is informed by WCM's culture. It's really about "does a culture propel its moat trajectory forward." And in many cases what we are doing is reverse-engineering the question. What behaviors are driving that moat forward? Does the company incentivize that behavior? Very different for a Shopify vs a First Republic.  So I'd say this notion of alignment is really important. Is there alignment between the culture and the moat trajectory. For Sherwin Williams it has been terrific. Their business model, the only paint company that is building a store network, is fully aligned with that service-driven culture. 

The other element we really focus on is adaptability. In fact in many industries it is very difficult to predict how the future is going to play out. You can spend your time trying to predict that, or you can spend your time trying to understand the culture, hey does that company have these attributes, are they internally candid, are they able to recognize change when it is happening and adapt to it. And if you can find that, the beauty of it is that they'll do the work for you. You don't have to predict the future as much, because they will try to turn risk into opportunities.

**Troy :** A highly regulated industry often calls for quite strict centralization. And then a tech-led industry often calls for decentralization. When you approach an industry like healthcare, which is both tech-driven but also highly regulated, what are you looking for from a cultural point of view to ensure that the company is aligned to its competitive advantages in a way that is sustainable?

**Sanjay :** It's an interesting question, that's something we are actually seeing across different sectors, for instance in the financial sector that is one of the biggest questions you have to ask with the collision of fintechs and legacy banks. Is there a marriage and an innovative culture with a risk-management culture. So you have to ask questions around both of those. And it's difficult because there is internal tension. If you are on the edge and overlooking some of the regulatory dynamics, you are going to run into problems. But if you are too focused on the regulatory backdrop and managing that, you are going to be less innovative. So understanding how to draw the line is something we have been doing with healthcare for a while. But for other industries like fintech, i don't think anyone is asking the question right now. I think this will be an increasingly important discussion point. Especially if we go through down cycles at some point. 

On that question of centralization/decentralization, we find that some companies are very purist about it, but on a topic such as the one you are talking about i think you need a balance. You need to find ways to decentralize innovation, when someone can put an idea, and there is a feedback loop and this idea is passed on to R&D and commercialized. Whereas a lot of the risk management and sometimes even the marketing workflow has to be centralized. So making sure that this balance stays intact is important. 

**Troy :** So to prioritize a culture trajectory in a way that mirrors the moat trajectory, does that mean you tend to screen out businesses that maybe lost their way, they are dominant in their industry but they have been misled for some time. The classic example of this is Microsoft where you could argue that there was an extraordinary culture transformation. But if you are only looking at healthy coaches you may not have participated in the turnaround.

**Sanjay :** Great question. One of the lessons we have learned with culture is that there is no one-size-fits-all culture. Another early one is that culture is just like moats, they change. They probably change slower, but they can change. We were making mistakes about having an outdated view on company culture. Often when there is a great culture there tends to be a halo that is created around that. And even when the culture is slipping people are really slow to recognize that. So for us, it is rewriting our cultural investment thesis every year and make sure there is no deterioration. There are certain flags we look for. Flags for corporate governance, flags for turnover. 

But then, to your point with Microsoft, could we have identified a framework to deal with cultural turnaround. In many cases, the worse the culture was beforehand, the easier it is to turnaround. Especially when there is a storied history. But that's a dangerous area. If you are too early you will probably make a lot of mistakes. If you are too late, maybe you will miss most of the alpha potential. 

So you want to calibrate that, when we get the confidence in the cultural turnaround to make an investment. To have a high hit rate and still have that longevity of performance is something you need to continually iterate on. But I would say that is an exciting field, we are working on leading thinkers on that prospect and academics. If we talk again in a couple of years i hope we will have a pretty good framework there. 

**Troy :** Maybe to switch to the management of the portfolio itself, what are the benefits of subdividing the portfolio between secular, defensive and cyclical growth companies? Is that Shopify alongside Pernod Ricard or Old Dominion Freight Lines?

**Sanjay :** Portfolio construction is about creating the foundation for rational decision making. More so than anything else. So you might ask, if you love enterprise tech or Saas companies, why don't you build a portfolio with thirty of them? You could probably do that and do well. You run the risk of having too narrow a  toolkit and you are going to have volatility. So can you sit down through that, that's a question. Some investors can and some cannot. But you are also running the risk that your toolkit loses relevance, that you cannot pivot and you put all your eggs in one basket and you are too slow to react to that.

On the other hand, you can have too broad a toolkit, you can have hundreds of stocks. But then you are diluting yourself into an index. We are big believers in downside capture, which is traditionally defined as downside protection. Can you hold up during times when the market is volatile. It goes beyond that. Downside capture is can you capitalize on the downside?

And so having some reasonable level of consistency in the results, we have different flavors and different types of moats, increases the chances that you will enter these periods with a backdrop of composure and strength behaviourally such that you can take advantage of it, rather than trying to put out fire, or trying to diagnose issues that impacted the whole portfolio. 

That idea of when times are volatile, such as Q1 of 2020, are you putting capital to work, are you capitalizing on that advantage, playing offense? It's critical and that's where portfolio construction comes most into play. Making sure that we are not just exposed to one single factor. Understanding that there are times where it hurts us. If we hold more technology companies, our performance would have probably been better than it has been. But thinking in terms of cycles, understanding that sentiment chips up and down across various factors, etc. So try to understand to have an all-weather portfolio has served us really well, as long as the consistency of the results is concerned. 

More importantly, the root of that is the importance of temperament. One of the core culture of the firm is gratitude and a big part of that is humility. You are going to make mistakes and there are opportunity costs if you don't think about portfolio construction that are very easy to under-appreciate. 

Where else could you spend your time, your bandwidth? If you did not have a well constructed portfolio you end up falling on low return-on-time activities. All your energy and time and bandwidth is devoted to one single topic. You are not seeing the other things you could have been doing. 

**Troy :** When you are balancing secular growth with defensive growth and cyclical growth, what role does valuation takes in defining the boundaries between those parts of the portfolio?Is it really recognizing the factors or the sentiments that are driving stock markets? 

**Sanjay :** Valuation is applied differently across the buckets. In defensive growth, it is generally asking the question how durable is this growth. And that tends to be a pretty simplistic valuation framework. You are looking at long term price earnings ratio, understanding based on my assumptions, what type of multiple would an investor pay in seven or eight years to generate double digits returns? Am I comfortable with that multiple based on the opportunity set?

For secular growth, you have to be a little bit more creative, quantitatively and qualitatively. Quantitatively you have to ask what can the world look like in five to ten years? How can the company capitalize on that? 
You also have to understand it qualitatively, how the narrative around the company is going to shift over the course of time. 

So take Shopify. Five years ago i mentioned there was a lot of debate on the stock, competition and customer quality. And so there was a very simplistic thesis, "hey, they will be the leader in what they do, they will climb the value chain and add more services to merchants." You could have argued that the stock would do very well. When you think today with Shopify, you have to rewrite this narrative shift and say "ok, those elements are well understood, everybody can agree that Shopify will be the leader in empowering e-commerce websites and apps, and increasingly omni-channel". Now it is a question of asking yourself "can they evolve from enabling e-commerce to shaping the future of e-commerce?" Their position in the value chain has evolved quite a bit, and that's a different bargain, that requires taking big bets. That requires competing with Amazon in a more direct way and to some extent Google and Facebook. And so those are different kind of questions, and you need to have a different qualitative perception around that narrative. You need to ask "Am I comfortable with them going from here to there", narrative-wise from today. 

So there are both qualitative and quantitative ways to think about that, but that is not as simplistic as going about defensive growth companies. 

**Troy :** Going back to what you said about behavioural benefits of having a broad split between secular, defensive and cyclical, I imagine one of them is having a defensive, resilient core to the portfolio allows the team itself to be more adaptable, more creative. Is that fair?

**Sanjay :** It's a great point. A big question we wrestle with is how do you do R&D inside an investment management firm? If you would split down that line, most investment management firms spend a lot in cost of goods sold, spend a lot on sales and marketing, not so much on R&D, cause the demands of the job, the day-to-day job, are very taxing. 

So how do you carve out time for R&D? That's an important question for us and there are a few ways to do it. One is through construction, just as you mentioned. If you can create a bedrock of the portfolio such that you can have coffee can names, that you can put in the coffee can and forget about them for a very long period of time. And there are a certain type of companies that fit the moat typology framework and fit the culture profile to be more coffee-can-ish names. They don't need a lot of time and energy because those names don't require as much maintenance and research. So it unlock time and energy bandwidth to tackle R&D. 

So the other way we are going about this is to think more creatively in the organisation of R&D. And we are launching something soon that will be called the artist studio. That will be an incubation lab inside the firm where people will be exclusively focused on R&D. So it's this framework of return on time. It's really really important with everything we do. 
