
[[Economies of Scale]] can be a crucial facet of a the success of [[Brands]], providing advantages in marketing and distribution. In prestige cosmetics, companies like Estée Lauder and L'Oreal  command large market shares. With associated high margins and capacity to spend on advertising and promotion, they can reach customers more easily than smaller rivals. In sporting goods, Nike can attack rivals posing a threat in a given market by immediately increasing exposure, even hiring the best local athletes to endorse products (see [[Marketing scale effect at Nike]]).

A similar dynamics holds for distribution. Scale enables a company to control its own distribution, or make it the supplier of choice for distributors. Large, established high-demand brands are less likely to be displaced by an emerging or new brand. Customers are unlikely to defect from a grocery store on the grounds that it did not carry a particular brand of toilet paper, but failure to carry Coca-Cola may well produce some defections.

Distribution, combined with A&P, is vital in attracting and retaining customers. The costs of running national television or magazine ads are invariant to brand size. For a small brand with lower margins, such costs consume a disproportionate share of total revenue. In addition, smaller brands typically have fewer distribution points compared to larger rivals, meaning higher costs per sale and fewer chances to connect with customers. There is a virtuous circle, giving larger players more bang for their buck.