# Scuttleblurb's research process

See also [[Scuttleblurb]]

**Q: What fascinates me most is your research process. You do such a good job, I'm curious what techniques I may be able to learn from you, though I suspect that there are no real tricks, just lots and lots of reading, asking questions and then tracking down answers, figuring out what is most important to focus on, etc... Can you describe what the research process is like for one of your long posts or series of posts?**

**Answer:** 
Like every analyst, I read SEC filings and transcripts, Google, watch relevant YouTube videos, talk to management (usually IR), and do the same for competitors and anyone else of note in the ecosystem. 

I write up every company that sparks my interest, whether I find the company an attractive investment opportunity at the time or not. I recall you mentioning that you research companies that speak to you regardless of how pricey they are and then keep those companies on a watchlist so that you're ready to pounce when valuation approaches something reasonable. I'm the same way.

Speaking from personal experience, most investment funds don't let their analysts do deep dives on interesting companies trading at uninteresting valuations. Try telling your PM that you're going to spend a month studying such-and-such industry because you find it interesting but there's probably nothing to buy at the moment and there may never be. See how that conversation goes. It's nice to be able to set your own research agenda.

But in the time it takes for a sane valuation to arrive you may find yourself forgetting what it is you found so interesting about the stock in the first place, so it's useful to have a write-up to refer back to. For the sake of efficiency, many analysts jot down bullet points and preserve a folder of notes, but there's something about long-form prose. I can't explain the underlying mechanics of how it happens, but oftentimes the very act of writing sparks an idea and exploring that idea in more detail leads me to an important point that I don't think I would've grasped otherwise. This was true with Align Technology, which on the surface looked like a static collection of expiring IP selling a commodity product whose economics were just waiting to be siphoned away by low-end clear aligner competition. Writing led me down the track of thinking about Align as a system of reinforcing pieces - data from case starts enabling more complex malocclusion cases; vertically integrated software and hardware crowding out competing solutions and saving orthodontists chair time; a strong brand synonymous with clear aligner treatment - that in concert fueled more case starts, data, manufacturing process improvements, orthodontist adoption, etc. (there's an argument to be made that Smile Direct Club is re-setting the basis of competition and presents the first major competitive threat to Align in over a decade, which I'll likely touch on in a future post).

I don't mean to sound prescriptive. I think many people find writing to be mentally taxing and maybe the time spent writing would be more efficiently put to use elsewhere.  I just happen to enjoy writing, it's like therapy for me, but I don't want to promote an approach that may not make sense for most others.