# Simplicity is an Advantage

In-N-Out Burger is one of those businesses with a cult following. For three years in a row, In-N-Out has been ranked the number one limited-service restaurant chain in the *Nation's Restaurant News* annual Consumer Picks report. And for decades, the restaurant chain has been a staple of California. Unlike McDonald's or other burger chains, In-N-Out has ruthlessly followed its initial winning formula. The chain has grown slowly and remains focused on utilizing the best ingredients while maintaining a simple menu. 

In-N-Out Burger and the companies profiled in this book share a discipline and a super focus on the areas where they dominate. Intelligent fanatics know that they can't be world-class at everything. In-N-Out's CEO, Lynsi Snyder, continues to demonstrate great discipline by not straying from the brand that her customers love. Randall Hyatt president of consulting firm Fessel International, describes Snyder's discipline:

> From the consumer standpoint, she hasn't done dramatic things. But she hasn't changed what they like, and that's a good thing. She does not have any public shareholder, so she's really accountable to her customers, and thousands of employees. But she's got both believing in the business model. If you get to the core, everyone believes that the In-N-Out Burger concept produces a high quality burger. 

Lack of focus can be harmful by diverting's management attention and potentially leading to value destruction. Anheuser-Busch once owned Eagle Snacks but failed to transfer its market presence into the snack market.  The brand was a bust and was sold to Procter and Gamble in 1996. Coca-Cola marketed New Coke in the 1980s, which was a major flop. The 3G partners strayed from owning and managing a small subset of large businesses when they setup 3G Investments  in the early 1990s. Their portfolio of twenty-five to thirty companies, although not a flop, was not nearly as successful as their other businesses.

Jorge Paulo Lemann best described the super focus that intelligent fanatics possess:

> All the successful people i have ever met were fanatics about focus. Sam Walton, who built [[Walmart]], thought only about stores day and night. He visited store after store. Even Warren Buffett, who today is my partner, is a man super focused on his formula. He acquires diverse businesses but always within the same formula, and that's what works. Today our formula is to buy companies with a good name and to come up with our management system. But we can only do this when we have people available to go to the company. We cannot do what the American private equity firms do. They buy any company, send someone there, and constitute a team. We only know how to do this with our team, people within our culture. Then, focus is also essential.

Our CEOs' business models were extremely simple. In fact, Sol Price was highly reluctant to share his secret. It was so simple that he feared appearing stupid. His secret was to "sell things as cheaply as I can". Les Schwab told his managers, "Sell tires, give service, keep expenses low, make sure everything is billed out, keep good communication with employees, be careful with credit, watch for leaks... Do these things and you'll come out all right."

Intelligent fanatics often run their business without an extensive, detailed business plan. Anyone can make great projections, but few can develop a simple yet effective and unconventional business model and work hard to put it in motion. Herb Kelleher once said:

> We've never done the long-range planning that is customary in many businesses. When planning became big in the airline community, one of the analysts came up to me and said, "Herb, I understand you don't have a plan." I said that we have the most unusual plan in the industry: Doing things. That's our plan. What we do by way of strategic planning is we define ourselves and then we redefine ourselves.