# Social insects

The exploits of the social insects are legendary, in particular their astonishing feats of cooperation and apparent altruism.  Suicidal stinging  missions typify their prodigies of self-abnegation. In the 'honey pot' ants there is a caste of workers with grotesquely swollen, food-packed abdomens, whose sole function in life is to hang motionless from the ceiling like bloated light-bulbs, being used as food stores by the other workers.

In the human sense they do not live as individuals at all; their individuality is subjugated, apparently to the welfare of the community. A society of ants, bees, or termites achieves a kind of individuality at a higher level. Food is shared to such an extent that one may speak of a communal stomach.  Information is shared so efficiently by chemical signals and by the famous 'dance' of the bees that the community behaves almost as if it were a unit with a nervous system and sense organs of its own. Foreign intruders are recognized and repelled with something of the selectivity of a body's immune reaction system. The rather high temperature inside a beehive is regulated nearly as precisely as that of the human body, even though an individual bee is not a 'warm blooded' animal. Finally and most importantly, the analogy extends to reproduction. The majority of individuals in a social insect colony are sterile workers. 

The 'germ line' - the line of immortal gene continuity - flows  through the bodies of a minority of individuals, the reproductives. These are the analogues of our own reproductive cells in our testes and ovaries. The sterile workers are the analogy of our liver, muscle, and nerve cells.

Kamikaze behavior and other forms of altruism and cooperation by workers are not astonishing once we accept the fact that they are sterile. The body of a normal animal is manipulated to ensure the survival of its genes both through bearing offspring and through caring for other individuals containing the same genes. Suicide in the interests of caring for other individuals is incompatible with future bearing of one's own offspring. Suicidal self-sacrifice therefore seldom evolves. But a worker bee never bears offspring of its own. All its efforts are directed to preserving its genes by caring for relatives other than its own offspring. The death of a single sterile worker bee is nor more serious to its genes than is the shedding of a leaf in autumn to the genes of a tree.

There is a temptation to wax mystical about the social insects, but there is really no need for this. It is worth looking in some detail at how the [[Selfish Gene]] theory deals with them, and in particular at how it explains the evolutionary origin of that extraordinary phenomenon of worker sterility from which so much seems to follow.

A social insect colony is a huge family, usually all descended from the same mother. The workers, who seldom or never reproduce themselves, are often divided into a number of distinct castes, including small workers, large workers, soldiers, and highly specialized castes  like the honey pots. Reproductive females are called queens. Reproductive males are sometimes called drones or kings. In the more advanced societies, the reproductives never work at anything except procreation, but at this task they are extremely good. They rely on the workers for their food and protection, and the workers are also responsible for looking after the brood.

In some ant and termite species the queen has swollen into a gigantic egg factory, scarcely recognizable as an insect at all, hundreds of times the size of a worker and quite incapable of moving.  She is constantly tended by workers who groom her, feed her, and transport her ceaseless flow of eggs to the communal nurseries. If such a monstrous queen ever has to move from the royal cell she rides in state on the backs of squadrons of toiling workers.

We should keep in mind the distinction between bearing and caring towards offspring. Either each individual in the population can behave in a mixed way: thus individuals usually achieve a judicious mixture of bearing and caring; or the population may be divided into two different types of individuals: this was how we first pictured the balance between [[Evolutionarily Stable Strategy | hawks and doves]]. Now it is theoretically possible for an evolutionarily stable balance between bearing and caring to be achieved in the latter kind of way: the population could be divided into bearers and carers. But this can only be evolutionarily stable if the carers are close kin to the individuals for whom they care, at least as close as they would be to their own offspring if they had any. Although it is theoretically possible for evolution to proceed in this direction, it seems to be only in the social insects that it has actually happened.

Social insects individuals are divided into two main classes, bearers and carers. The bearers are the reproductive males and females. The carers are the workers - infertile males and females in the termites, infertile females in all other social insects. Both types do their job more efficiently because they do not have to cope with the other. But from whose point of view is it efficient? The question which will be hurled at the Darwinian theory is the familiar cry: 'What's in it for the workers?'

Some people have answered, 'Nothing'. They feel that the queen is  having it all her own way, manipulating the workers by chemical means to her own selfish ends, making them care for her own teeming brood. The opposite idea is that the workers 'farm' the reproductives, manipulating them to increase their productivity in propagating replicas of the worker's genes. To be sure, the survival machines that the queen makes are not offspring to the workers but they are close relatives nevertheless. It was Hamilton who brilliantly realized that, at least in the ants, bees, and wasps, the workers may actually be more closely related to the brood than the queen herself is! This led him, and later Trivers and Hare, on to one of the most spectacular triumphs of the selfish gene theory. The reasoning goes like this.

Insects of the group known as the Hymenoptera, including ants, bees, and wasps, have a very odd system of sex determination. Termites do not belong to this group and they do not share the same peculiarity. A hymenopteran nest typically has only one mature queen. She made one mating flight when young and stored up the sperms for the rest of her long life - ten years or even longer. She rations the sperms out to her eggs over the years, allowing the eggs to be fertilized as they pass out through her tubes. But not all the eggs are fertilized. 

The unfertilized ones develop into males. A male therefore has no father, and all the cells of his body contain just a single set of chromosomes (all obtained from his mother) instead of a double set (one from the father and one from the mother) as in ourselves. 

A female hymenopteran, on the other hand, is normal in that she does have a father, and she has the usual double set of chromosomes in each of her body cells. Whether a female develops into a worker or a queen depends not on her genes but how she is brought up. That is to say, each female has a complete set of queen-making genes, and a complete set of worker-making genes (or, rather, set of genes for making each specialized cast of worker, soldier, etc.). Which set of genes is 'turned on' depends on how the female is reared, in particular the food she receives.

Although there are many complications, this is essentially how things are. We do not know why this extraordinary system of sexual reproduction evolved. No doubt there were good reasons, but for the moment we must just treat it as a curious fact about the Hymenoptera. It means that the sperms of a single male, instead of all being different as in ourselves, are all exactly the same. A male has only a single set of genes in each of his body cells, not a double set. Every sperm must therefore receive the full set of genes rather than a 50 percent sample, and all sperms from a given male are therefore identical.

Let us now try to calculate the relatedness (see [[Kin Selection]]) between a mother and son. If a male is known to possess gene A, what are the chances that his mother shares it? The answer must be 100%, since the male had no father and obtained all his genes from his mother. But now suppose a queen is known to have the gene B. The chance that her son shares the gene is only 50 percent, since he contains only half her genes.

From the point of view of a gene A in the body of a queen, the chance that the gene is shared by a son is 1/2, just as it is for a daughter. From a queen's point of view therefore, her offspring, of either sex, are as closely related to her as human children are to their mother.

Things start to get intriguing when we come to sisters. Full sisters not only share the same father: the two sperms that conceived the, were identical in every gene. The sisters are therefore equivalent to identical twins as far as their paternal genes are concerned. If one female has gene A, she must have got it from either her father or her mother. If she got it from her mother then there is a 50 percent chance that her sister shares it. But if she got it from her father, the chances are 100 percent that her sister shares it. Therefore the relatedness between hymenopteran full sisters is not 1/2 as it would be for normal sexual animals, but 3/4. 

It follows that a hymenopteran female is more closely related to her full sisters than she is to her offspring of either sex. As Hamilton realized, this might well predispose a female to farm her own mother as an efficient sister-making machine. A gene for vicariously making sisters replicates itself more rapidly than a gene for making offspring directly. hence worker sterility evolved. It is presumably no accident that true sociality, with worker sterility, seems to have evolved no fewer than eleven times *independently* in he Hymenoptera and only once in the whole of the rest of the animal kingdom, namely in the termites.

However, there is a catch. If the workers are successfully to farm their mother as a sister-producing machine, they must somehow curb her natural tendency to give them an equal number of little brothers as well. From the point of view of a worker, the chance of any one brother containing a particular one of her genes is only 1/4. Therefore, if the queen were allowed to produce male and female reproductive offspring in equal proportions, the farm would not show a profit as far as the workers were concerned. They would not be maximizing the propagation of their precious genes.

Trivers and Hare realized that the workers must try to bias the sex ratio in favor of females. They took the Fisher calculations on optimal sex ratios, and re-worked them for the special case of the Hymenoptera. It turned out that the stable ratio of investment for a mother is, as usual, 1:1. But the stable ratio for a sister is 3:1 in favor of sisters rather than brothers. If you are an hymenopteran female, the most efficient way for you to propagate your genes is to refrain from breeding yourself, and to make your mother provide you with reproductive sisters and brothers in the ratio 3:1. But if you must have offspring on your own, you can benefit you genes best by having reproductive sons and daughters in equal proportions.

As we have seen, the difference between queens and workers is not a genetic one. As far as her genes are concerned, an embryo female might be destined to become either a worker, who 'wants' a 3:1 ratio, or a queen, who 'wants' a 1:1 sex ratio. So what does this 'wanting' mean? It means that a gene that finds itself in a queen's body can propagate itself best if that body invests equally in reproductive sons and daughters. But the same gene finding itself in a worker's body can propagate itself best by making the mother of that body have more daughters than sons.

There is no real paradox here. A gene must take best advantage of the levers of power that happen to be at its disposal. If it finds itself in a position to influence the development of a body that is destined to turn into a queen, its optimal strategy to exploit that control is one thing. If it finds itself in a position to influence the way a worker's body develops, its optimal strategy to exploit that power is different.

This means there is a conflict of interest down on the farm. The queen is 'trying' to invest equally in males and females. The workers are trying to shift the ratio of reproductives in the direction of three females to every one male. If we are right to picture the workers as the farmers and the queen as their brood mare, presumably the workers will be successful in achieving their 3:1 ratio. If not, if the queen really lives up to her name and the workers are her slaves and the obedient tenders of the royal nurseries, then we should expect the 1:1 ratio which the queen 'prefers' to prevail. Who wins in this special case of a battle of the generations? This is a matter that can be put to the test and that is what Trivers and Hare did, using a large number of species of ants.

The sex ratio that is of interest is the ratio of male to female reproductives. These are the large winged forms which emerge from the ants' nest in periodic bursts for mating flights, after which the young queens may try to find new colonies. It is these winged forms that have to be counted to obtain an estimate of the sex ratio. Now the male and female reproductives are, in many species, very unequal in size. This complicates things since sex ratio stricly apply, not to numbers of males and females, but to quantity of investment in males and females. Trivers and Hare made allowance for this when weighing them. They took 20 species of ant and estimated the sex ratio in terms of investment in reproductives. they found a rather convincingly close fit to the 3:1 female to male ratio predicted by the theory that the workers are running the show for their own benefit.

It seems that in the ants studied, the conflict of interests is 'won' by the workers. This is not too surprising since worker bodies, being the guardians of the nurseries, have more power in practical terms than queen bodies. Genes trying to manipulate the world through queen bodies are outmanoeuvred by genes manipulating the world through worker bodies. It is interesting to look around for some special circumstances in which we might expect queens to have more practical power than workers. Trivers and Hare realized that there was just such a circumstance which could be used as a critical test of the theory.

This arises from the fact that there are some species of ant that take slaves. The workers of a slave-making species either do no ordinary work at all or are rather bad at it. What they are good at is going on slaving raid. True warfare in which large rival armies fight to the death is known only in man and in social insects. In many species of ants the specialized cast of workers known as soldiers have formidable fighting jaws, and devote their time to fighting for the ant colony against other ant armies. Slaving raids are just a particular kind of war effort. The slavers mount an attack on a nest of ants belonging to a different species, attempt to kill the defending workers or soldiers, and carry off the unhatched young. These young ones hatch out in the nest of their captors. They do not realize that they are slaves and they set to work following their built-in nervous programs, doing all the duties that they would normally perform in their own nest. The slave-making workers or soldiers go on further slaving expeditions while the slaves stay at home and get on with the everyday business of running an ant's nest, cleaning, foraging, and caring for the brood.

The slaves are, of course, blissfully ignorant of the fact that they are unrelated to the queen and to the brood that they are tending. Unwittingly they are rearing new platoons of slave-makers. No doubt natural selection, acting on the genes of the slave species, tends to favor anti-slavery adaptations. However, these are evidently not fully effective because slavery is a wide spread phenomenon.

The consequence of slavery that is interesting from our present point of view is this. The queen of the slave-making species is now in a position to bend the sex ratio in the direction she 'prefers'. This is because her own true-born children, the slavers, no longer hold the practical power in the nurseries. This power is now held by the slaves. The slaves 'think' they are looking after their own siblings and they are presumably doing whatever *would be appropriate in their own nests* to achieve their desired 3:1  bias in favor of sisters. But the queen of the slave-making species is able to get away with the counter-measures and there is no selection operating on the slaves to neutralize these counter-measures, since the slaves are totally unrelated to the brood.

For example, suppose that in any ant species, queens 'attempt' to disguise male eggs by making them smell like female ones. Natural selection will normally favor any tendency by workers to 'see through' the disguise. We may picture an evolutionary battle in which  queens will continually 'change the code' and workers 'break the code'. The war will be won  by whoever manages to get more of her genes into the next generation, via the bodies of the reproductives. This will normally be the workers, as we have seen.

But when the queen of a slave-making species changes the code, the slave workers cannot evolve any ability to break the code. This is because any gene in a slave worker 'for breaking the code' is not represented in the body of any reproductive individual, and so is not passed on. The reproductives all belong to the slave-making species, and are kin to the queen but not to the slaves. 

If the genes of the slaves find their way into any reproductives at all, it will be into the reproductives that emerge from the original nest from which they were kidnapped. The slave workers will, if anything, be busy breaking the wrong code! Therefore, queens of a slave-making species can get away with changing their code freely, without there being any danger that genes for breaking the code will be propagated into the next generation.

The upshot of this involved argument is that we should expect in slave-making species that the ratio of investment in reproductive of the two sexes should approach 1:1 rather than 3:1. For once, the queen will have it all her own way. This is just what Trivers and Hare found, although they only looked at two slave-making species.

I have used the analogy of farming for what hymenopteran workers do to their mothers. The farm is a gene farm. The workers use their mother as a more efficient manufacturer of copies of their own genes than they would be themselves. The genes come off the production line in packages called reproductive individuals. This farming analogy should not be confused with a quite different sense in which the social insects may be said to farm. Social insects discovered, as man did long after, that settled cultivation of food can be more efficient than hunting and gathering.

For example, several species of ants in the New World, and, quite independently, termites in Africa, cultivate 'fungus gardens'. The best known are the so-called parasol ants of South America. These are immensely successful. Single colonies with more than two million individuals have been found. Their nests consist of huge spreading underground complexes of passages and galleries going down to a depth of ten feet or more, made by the excavation of as much as 40 tons of soil. The underground chambers contain the fungus gardens. 

The ants deliberately sow fungus of a particular species in special compost beds which they prepare by chewing leaves into fragments. Instead of foraging directly for their own food, the workers forage for leaves to make compost. The 'appetite' of a colony of parasol ants for leaves is gargantuan. This makes them a major economic pest, but the leaves are not food for themselves but food for their fungi. The ants eventually harvest and eat the fungi and feed them to their brood. The fungi are more efficient at breaking down leaf material than the ants' own stomachs would be, which is how the ants benefit by the arrangement. It is possible that the fungi benefit too, even though they are cropped: the ants propagate them more efficiently than their own spore dispersal mechanism might achieve.

Furthermore, the ants 'weed' the fungus gardens, keeping them clear of alien species of fungi. By removing competition, this may benefit the ants' own domestic fungi. A kind of relationship of mutual altruism  could be said to exist between ants and fungi. It is remarkable that a very similar system of fungus-farming has evolved independently, among the quite unrelated termites.

Ants have their own domestic animals as well as their crop plants. Aphids - greenfly and similar bugs - are highly specialized for sucking the juice out of plants. They pump the sap up out of the plants' veins more efficiently than they subsequently digest it. The result is that they excrete a liquid that has had only some of its nutritious value extracted. Droplets of sugar-rich 'honeydew' pass out of the back end at a great rate, in some cases more than the insect's own body weight every hour. The honey-dew normally rains down to the ground - it may well have been the providential food known as 'manna' in the Old Testament. But ants 'milk' the aphids by stoking their hind-quarters with their feelers and legs. Aphids respond to this, in some cases apparently holding back their droplets until an ant strokes them, and even withdrawing a droplet if an ant is not ready to accept it.

It has been suggested that some aphids have evolved a backside that looks and feels like an ant's face, the better to attract ants. What the aphids have to gain from the relationship is apparently protection from their natural enemies. Like our own dairy cattle they lead a sheltered life, and aphid species that are much cultivated by ants have lost their normal defensive mechanisms.

In some cases ants care for the aphid eggs inside their own underground nests, feed the young aphids, and finally, when they are grown, gently carry them up to the protected grazing grounds.

A relationship of mutual benefit between members of different species is called mutualism or [[Symbiosis]]. Members of different species often have much to offer each other because they can bring different 'skills' to the partnership. This kind of fundamental asymmetry can lead to [[Evolutionarily Stable Strategy]]  of mutual cooperation. Aphids have the right sort of mouthparts for pumping up plant sap, but such sucking mouthparts are no good for self-defense. Ants are no good at sucking sap from plants, but they are good at fighting. Ant genes for cultivating and protecting aphids have been favored in ant gene pools. Aphid genes for cooperating with the ants have been favored in aphid gene pools.