# Sources of investment edge
### What is an investment edge?

**An edge is a repeatable sourcing of variant perception that leads to sustained outperformance.**

### Sources of variant perceptions:
- Informational (not happening now, most of it is insider trading and illegal)
- Analytical: You have an insight (See [[Two modes of investment idea generation]]) that other analysts missed
- Structural: Some institutionals cannot invest in very small capitalisations. They also have stakeholders with a short-term horizon
- Behavioral: it really exists, but very hard/impossible to implement in practice. It is very likely that you will have the same behavioral biases as the rest of the market. See also [[Jim O'Shaughnessy on Human Nature]]



## Josh Wolfe on Investment edge:

Edge is a key element of Lux’s investment philosophy: **edge can derive from informational, analytical or behavioral sources.** Get better information about an asset (an entrepreneur or technology), or the same information but sooner; analyze that information differently in a way that leads to a novel conclusion (a variant perception) on the importance or magnitude or timing of the asset’s value; or behave individually and as a team in a way that uniquely leads us to great assets (avoid herds and fads, seek what others don’t, venture out a limb as that’s where the proverbial fruit is).*

It is worth taking some time to discuss a few examples of each of the sources of edge identified by Wolfe.

_Informational:_ Bill Miller has written that this type of edge “is the easiest to exploit and the hardest to find.” One method for acquiring better information is to have what Phil Fisher called a “scuttlebutt network” of people he could consult for advice or expertise. In interviews Wolfe has talked about how his informational advantage often comes from his existing relationships with people and including board members of portfolio companies. An informational advantage can also be found by reading what few other people read which I will talk about more in the next set of quotes.

_Analytical:_ Bill Miller view on this is: “Analytical advantages come from taking publicly available information and processing or weighting it differently from the others.” One way to generate an analytical type of edge is to focus on having a better investing process. Wolfe and I are huge fans of the work of Michael Mauboussin. If you want to improve your analytical edge, read everything Mauboussin writes and hear him speak whenever you can. Ray Dalio has worked to create an analytical edge at Bridegwater with his “principles” including radical transparency. Sustaining the idea meritocracy universally in a company is difficult, even with computer facilitation, because (1) the number of connections grows with the square of the number of involved employees; and (2) people are unwilling to accept that much unfiltered feedback all the time (human empathy evolved for a reason). As another example of someone trying to gain an analytical edge, I like to understand the business models of as many businesses as I can. More more different types of business models I learn about, the greater my analytical edge can become. Understanding businesses makes me a better investor and understanding more about different types of investing investing makes me better at business. This idea is borrowed from a famous Warren Buffet quote. Specialization in one type of analytical edge which trying to understand the basics about all styles as best I can has worked well for me. It is also a lot of fun. If you would rather play golf, buy a low cost diversified portfolio of funds that are indexed.

_Behavioral_: Bill Miller believes: “Behavioral advantages are the most interesting because they are the most durable. The field of behavioral finance is still in its infancy yet has already yielded results that can be incorporated profitably into a sound investment process. The best part is that such results are likely to be systematically exploitable and not able to be arbitraged away as they become more widely known. That is because they represent broad findings about how large groups of people are likely to behave under well-defined circumstances. Until large numbers of people are able to alter their psychology (don’t hold your breath), there is money to be made from prospect theory, support theory, cognitive psychology, and neuroscience.” One approach to creating a behavioral edge is to arbitrage a factor like time. For example, payoffs that are later in time are less popular with most investors since most people are biased toward immediate gratification. It is easier to find mispriced bets that have longer term payoffs that acceptable to many people. The more focused Mr. Market is on realizing immediate gratification on a given type of asset, the bigger the opportunity for someone who can be patient over a longer term. Wolfe also believes that potential for gain that is too long term is also unwise. For example, basic research with very long-term payoffs is best funded by universities and governments since it is what is known as a “public good.” For investors, there is an investing time horizon that is “just right” to create a behavioral edge as was the case in the Goldilocks story.