Strong customer relationships are wonderful but reliance on precious few creates concentration risk. Despite a strong business model and solid historical bonds, such dependency adds uncertainty. As with friendships, business relationships change, often inexplicably. Besides the negative consequences of losing a key customer, the threat of defection confers bargaining power that big customers can use to extract economic concessions that alone or in aggregate may pose significant costs.

Many contemporary challenges facing food and beverage companies arise from their concentrated customer base. Large grocery retailers know their high value to their manufacturers and use it to negotiate lower prices and more favorable terms than they would have gotten otherwise.

Concentration risk extends beyond customers to include suppliers on the production end, who may charge higher prices, and distributors on the sales end, who may offer lower prices. A goof example of supplier concentration is Safilo, a smaller peer of Luxottica. With more limited retail presence and a narrower portfolio of licensed brands, Safilo has in recent years lost several key licenses, including those of Armani and Polo Ralph Lauren, to Luxottica. Those losses have been costly and the company's stock has tumbled, lagging the market by more than 80% since the end of 2005. 

In some cases, concentration risks include other stakeholders too, such as employees, bankers, and even shareholders. Concentration in any part of  a company's value chain harbors hidden risks that can degrade its economics. En example is the impact of Global Distribution System (GDS) on the airline industry. Through the 1990s, before the advent of direct internet distribution, GDS became the primary way customers bought airline tickets. Although begun by the airlines, GDS became the gateway to a vast network of travel agents, who along with travelers were the ultimate beneficiaries. While airlines have recovered some ground through direct internet sales from their websites, GDS companies like Spain's Amadeus generate impressive operating margins and considerable returns on capital that dwarf those of most airlines.   