# Stock Market & Independence of participants


See first [[The Wisdom of Crowds]]

We know the stock market is an incentive-based system that can aggregate investor decisions. What we need to understand is the marekt's level of diversity and the independence of its participants. If the stock market is adequately diversified and, most importantly, if the decisions of its participants have been reached independently, the it is likely the market is efficient. Surowiecki reminds us that just because we can observe some irrational investors, that does not necessarily mean the market is inefficient. Indeed, proponents of the efficient market hypothesis have latched onto the Wisdom of Crowds as a plausible explanation for market efficiency.

But what if independence is lost? What if the decisions of the market's participants are not independent but are now coalesced into one opinion? When this occurs, the system has effectively lost its diversity and along with it any chance of generating an optimal solution. If diversity is the key to how collectives can best reach solutions, then diversity breakdowns are the cause of sub-optimal outcomes - or in the case of the stock market, diversity breakdowns cause the market to become inefficient.

Scientists are now turning their attention to understanding what causes diversity breakdowns. Michael Mauboussin tells us that "information cascades occurs when people make decisions based on the actions of others rather than on their own private information. These cascades help explain booms, fads, fashions, and crashes." Social network theorists, who view social relationships in terms of nodes and ties, whereby nodes are the individual actors and ties a are the relationships between the actors, consider this to be the proper framework for understanding how information cascades can sweep across large populations.

Mauboussin also reminds us diversity breakdown are not just a large group phenomenon but can also occur in smaller groups. Whether it be a committee, jury, or small working team, information cascades, which lead to diversity breakdowns, are often the result of a dominant leader operating with limited facts, sometimes even with no facts.