# Superpower of Incentives
Studies have shown that financial [[incentives]] are not the only human motivator, and sometimes inhibit creativity and performance. Teresa Amabile, a psychologist at Harvard Business School, studied the effect of financial rewards on creativity and found that novice painters are more creative without a financial incentive. Non-incented participants' internal motivation was stronger in unleashing their creativity. On the other hand, Jacob Eisenberg and William Thompson studied the effect of financial incentives on experienced musicians' improvisational ability. Their results were different from Amabile's - the experienced musician performed better with the financial incentive. Examining these studies, Eric Weiner concludes that a combination of both intrinsic and extrinsic factors would be the best way to motivate people: 

> Some, for instance, might be initially motivated by the promise of an external reward (money, status, etc.), but once immersed in the work they enter a psychological state known as flow. They forget about any external pressure and even lose track of time. That is what Watson and Crick (who discovered DNA) said happened to them. They desperately wanted to win the Nobel, but once they immersed themselves in the research, the prize receded to the back of their minds. 

[[Intelligent fanatics]] are able to create systems of financial incentive that attract high-quality talent, and they provide a culture and higher cause that immerses employees in their work. They are able to easily communicate the why and the purpose of the company so that employees themselves can own the vision. This is extremely important, because most employees do not know their employer's vision and, of course, cannot be invested in what they do not know or understand.

For John Patterson, the vision was more than providing the best cash register; it was keeping employees from stealing from their employers. For Simon Marks, it was to bring high-quality clothing and other merchandise to the masses. For Sol Price, it was to sell the best product at the lowest price. For Les Schwab, it was to give the customer the best service and to provide opportunities for employees to succeed. For Herb Kelleher, it was to bring flying to the masses, with the cheapest fares and best customer service. For Chester Cadieux, it was to provide customers with the greatest convenience. For Ken Iverson, it was to become the most efficient and cheapest steel operator. In every case, all employees knew their company's mission and embraced it fully.

Investment in physical assets for the benefit of the future is not the only focus of great leaders; they also invest heavily in their human capital. Great leaders instinctively understand that a small team of top talent can run circles around far larger but less talented groups. AB InBev's Carlos Brito says: "That distinguishes you from an average company is the kind of people you can attract, retain, develop, train, promote..."

An intelligent fanatic's priority is to give talented employees an opportunity to grow within his or her organization. At Les Schwab Tire Centers, Les Schwab said his company's mission was to provide opportunities for young people to succeed. QuikTrip's Chet Cadieux similarly said: "If we've hired the right people, with consistent, aligned values, and then you go and try to make them successful, or at least give them the opportunity to become successful, you are going to be a successful organization."

An employee-first mentality was generally at the core of each of the book's case studies. This specific mindset creates positive feedback loops. When employees are treated well, employees treat customers well. Customers tell their friends - and return - and this serves shareholders well. This is in contrast to the shareholder-first mentality of most corporations. Focusing purely on shareholders, with little regard for employee or customers, leads companies to try to cater to the whims of the market.

All of this book's intelligent fanatic CEOs unleashed their employees' fullest potential by getting them to think and act as owners.  They did this two ways: they provided a financial incentive, aligning employees with the actual owners, and they gave employees intrinsic motivation to think like owners. In every case, CEOs communicated the importance of each and every employee to the organization and provided incentives that were simple to understand. 

When most people on Wall Street hear about lowering costs, they think layoffs and decreasing employee wages and benefits to increase profits. Although that might be the correct strategy in the short term, in the long term, poor employee pay and benefits is a terrible strategy. It's counter-intuitive. Our [[intelligent fanatics]] CEOs gave employees the chance to earn more, and in most cases a lot more, compared to the competition. Giving employees the opportunity to earn the most attracts the best talent, letting managers be very selective in who they hire. 

QuikTrip's offer of a nearly $50'000 starting salary for new store workers lures a large applicant pool. QuikTrip hires only a quarter of a percent of all applicants. In similar fashion, but with a twist, Nucor and the 3G companies also receive a huge number of applicants but only offer 65% to 70% the industry wage.  This is possible because employees can potentially earn multiples of their fixed salaries if they achieve top production numbers. In-N-Out also takes care of its workforce better than competitors. All new associates start at $11 an hour, and even part-time workers receive benefits. Competitors pay much less per hour and part-timers do not receive the same benefits. 

The next challenge is to retain those great employees. In everyone of our case studies, the companies promoted from within and encouraged employees to move up in the ranks. This gives all workers the ability to have a career with the company and to reach their fullest potential. It also ensures that outsiders, who lack full understanding of the company's DNA, cannot come in and destroy the [[corporate culture]]. Promoting from within strengthen the [[corporate culture]] so much that most employees will stay at the company for life, and enjoy it. Carlos Brito says that there are no shortcuts in building a quality workforce. You can't hire them from elsewhere, you must grow them internally.

Southwest Airlines, Marks & Spencer, [[Costco]], In-N-Out, SEI Investments, Les Schwab Tire Centers, QuikTrip, the 3G companies, and Nucor have some of the lowest turnover rates in their industries, teens or even lower. Once an employee gets past the six-month mark, statistically, he or she will be with the company forever. Low employee turnover is both cost effective in terms of capital investment, and it helps solidify the [[corporate culture]] over the long term.

The intelligent fanatic CEOs gave some type of financial ownership to employees. Nearly all of our [[intelligent fanatics]] established a generous profit-sharing program, often the first in their industry. Others have generous pension-type vehicles that provide for the financial well-being of employees. An ownership mindset helps align everyone in the organization because employees think much differently if they have an ownership stake in the business. 

Financial incentives of high pay, profit sharing, or other ownership-type vehicles are a powerful incentive. However, our [[intelligent fanatics]] went above and beyond that. In order for employees to truly feel that they are in control, they are given large responsibilities and the authority to personally make important decisions. [[Intelligent fanatics]] trust their employees to do what is right. This [[Decentralized Organizations| decentralized]] model puts the decision making in the hands of those who have the best knowledge of the situation - those on the front lines.
