While banks worldwide sank amid the global financial crisis of 2008, Svenska Handelsbanken of Sweden excelled. Fundamental structures and attitudes - the stuff of [[Corporate Culture]] - explain why. 

The bank, founded in the 1870s, took its current cultural shape in the 1970s under the leadership of CEO Jan Wallender. Handelsbanken's motto - "the branch is the bank" - reflects its thoroughly [[Decentralized Organizations| decentralized]] structure. Branch managers make all operating decisions for their branch, on location: hiring; product offerings; and client outreach and management. Each branch manager is accordingly fully responsible for their branch's profit and loss, with no deflecting of responsibility to other departments or functions.

One result of such local knowledge and clear responsibility is Handelsbanken's superior credit loss performance. Another is how the bank consistently scores at the top of customer satisfaction surveys. These practices also explain why Handelsbanken is successfully bucking adverse banking industry trends: as rivals close branches and centralize customer relations, Handelsbanken is doing the opposite.

While other banks pay bankers bonuses that skew incentives toward high-risk strategies, Handelsbanken pays no bonuses for top executives or risk-takers. Rather, Handelsbanken offers a profit-sharing system for all employees, much of which is invested in Handelsbanken shares. One result: employees are the bank's largest shareholders. Such a structure breeds loyalty: staff turnover is far below the industry average. 

Risk aversion is deeply embedded in Handelsbanken culture. Its management philosophy is to take risks only in areas where it has demonstrable strengths and to minimize all others. It has consistently run a conservative liquidity profile, with superlative capital ratios and longer duration of funding versus peers. Unlike most large European banks, Handelsbanken eschews high-risk, speculative proprietary trading.

These cultural traits explain why, during the global financial crisis of 2008, Handelsbanken was a net lender to peer banks and the overall banking system, including lending to the Swedish Central Bank. In an earlier financial crisis afflicting Swedish banks in the early 1990s, Handelsbanken was also the beacon of strength: it was the only Swedish bank that did not receive state aid or become nationalized.

Such risk aversion is also evident in how the company approaches  growth.  The expansion of most European banks has typically been by acquisitions or speculative capital allocation into Eastern Europe and emerging markets, with little success. Handelsbanken's model allows it to pursue profitable organic growth in safer and more stable markets, such as the Nordic states and, more recently, the UK.

Financial returns reflect these distinctive structures and attitudes: steady organic earnings growth combined with regular market share gains have translated into Handelsbanken outperforming its Nordic peer group in return on equity every single year for the last 43 years. 

Since late 2007, returns to owners (increase in equity plus dividends) have compounded at 15%. While the vast majority of European banks earn less today than before the crisis and their average share price have halved, Handelsbanken earns more and its share price has more than doubled. Culture pays.