# Syngenta
Syngenta was formed in 2000 by combining the Novartis and AstraZeneca agribusinesses, with roots traceable to the 1930s. It is today's global market leader in crop protection and among the top three players in seeds. Its peer group include Bayer, BASF, Dow, DuPont and Monsanto. Syngenta has the broadest crop presence in the industry including Corn, Soybean, Specialty Crops and Cereals. Given the continually rising global demand for efficiently produced food, Syngenta is exposed to a compelling long-term dynamic. 

In the agribusiness, innovation is crucial. Without ongoing investment in the development of novel chemistry, rivals will grab market share. The scale and complexity of required R&D creates an entry barrier to smaller rivals, one reinforced by the considerable time required to develop and commercialize innovation in agricultural products. 

The cost to research, develop and launch just one new active ingredient can reach as much as $300 million and the process may take up to ten years. Given the scale, product range, expertise, and patience required to succeed, new entrants would incur substantially higher costs while not recovering the investment for many years.

Syngenta ranks among the largest investors of the sector in R&D - some $4 billion over the past three years alone. Payoffs are considerable. Product launches from 2011 to 2014 are estimated to have peak sales potential of some $2.7 billion, and the pipeline beyond this could contribute a further $4 billion. These outcomes attest to how an innovative product pipeline support sales growth.

The company's innovation responds to farmers' needs. For example, Latin American farmers faced enormous pressure from late season crop diseases. Syngenta has a longstanding leading position in this market and recently invested to develop a new fungicide, Solatenol, to fight rust. Farmers welcomed the product, which achieved first-year sales of $300 million  in Brazil alone, making it the largest product launch since the creation of the company, with a forecasted peak potential sales of $1 billion.  Such figures show that breakthrough innovation can yield considerable return on investment.

Syngenta can be responsive to customer needs by innovating with new mixtures that draw on existing resources to improve current products while experimenting to create products to address new challenges. Solatenol, for example, is combined with another product, Amistar (azoxystrobin), to produce Elatus to use specifically on soybeans. 

Syngenta illustrates how a business exposed to cycles can still prosper during downturns. Although farmer incomes are linked to crop prices, farmers continue to plant fields and protect crops in almost any economic environment. While farmers readily cut purchase of tractors and other capital expenditures during cyclical troughs, they tend to curtail the frequency of crop protection sprays more modestly. For Syngenta, this relatively stable environment supports the capacity for sustained long-term innovation.

Rising global demand for food from population growth and wealth increases cannot be met by increasing acreage but requires increasing the yields from existing acreage, which means innovation for greater agricultural efficiency.  Syngenta is poised to contribute this vital and valuable innovation. Leading in crop protection, with 20% of the global market and with a strong position in seed technology, Syngenta's unique portfolio of assets and strong culture of innovation position it well to maintain its attractive and stable long-term return on capital.

See [[Innovation culture]], [[Innovation Dominance]], [[R&D-led innovation]]
