# Talent Management


Despite all the evidence around process and benchmark-driven organizations, we find that management teams, investors, the press, and the public in general fixates on "talent". Especially the personalities, histories, motivations, and strategic visions of the leaders at the top of an organization. But talent, in our experience, is more a buzzword that gets thrown around and misused. That's not to say that leadership by a few exceptionally talented individuals doesn't matter. It most certainly does. The truth is, most companies have a barely average subset of both leaders and employees.

Yet almost every executive team to whom we've asked a simple question, "What makes your company different?", responds with "Our people - we have the best people." But every company can't have the best people. Someone has to be average; in fact half of the companies by definition have to have below-average talent. It may be even more depressing than that. With so much current-generation talent gravitating toward just a few big technology companies in each global region, what's left for the rest may be far lower than historical standards. So it's actually disturbing that many leaders operate with the false belief that their competitive advantage is, in fact, their people. We are not suggesting that a company give up on the goal of acquiring the best people it can find. People are obviously critical to an organization's success. but there has to be a system behind the people at the top that drives the behavior of all employees, regardless of talent level. Otherwise, the success of organization ebbs and flows in a rather volatile manner around the turnover or retirement of a small percentage of its talent.

If you look at most winning sports teams, the statistics show an interesting reality. A basketball or hockey team, for example, will typically have a few legitimate stars supported by several solid role players and others that can come off the bench and be somewhat helpful. What you find in the championship teams, however, is talent management at a different level. Stars typically perform as expected. They step up on the big stage. They perform exceptionally well in the big games. That's not a surprise. The differentiator is the role players. In winning teams, those folks perform better than their salary would otherwise predict, and the players themselves coexist in a system that is amazingly efficient in maximizing each player's respective skills. They are often led by a coach who keeps everyone focused and distractions at bay, who is willing to make the sometimes unpopular decisions in ridding the team of a "destructive" player, who may have talent but doesn't fit in the culture or who otherwise brings down the performance of others.

In the business world, driving that similar "win" will require a few stars for sure (let's say the top 5 percent of head count), but the differentiator of a championship-level performance is similar. *Getting average people to perform at a higher level is the key.* And we find that "average" may be a pretty fat middle of employees, perhaps 80 percent. The importance of filtering out those who are destructive (the bottom 15 percent is quite possible) cannot be underestimated. And yet we find an unhealthy fixation on the stars and little attention otherwise, which not only makes no practical sense but makes no mathematical sense. Simple math shows that filtering out the destructive talent (15 percent) has three times the impact of protecting the top (5 percent). And getting the fat middle (80 percent) to perform at just a 10 percent more impactful level would have three times the impact of getting the top 5 percent to improve by 50 percent.

Factoring in the challenges in business overall, once the employee head count gets to a certain level and the sexiness of the business itself begins to fade, it becomes statistically even harder to acquire more than a fair share of stars. The interview process itself has shown to be full of all kinds of pitfalls, with many researchers arguing that it's more of a flip of the coin than most would think. There may be only a handful of exceptions to this rule, and sustainability is questionable. "Hot" companies like Google probably get the pick of the litter in the tech world today, prestigious firms like Goldman Sachs may get a lot of the top folks in finance, and McKinsey likely attracts the best people in consulting. If you are an aerospace engineer, Boeing would seemingly be a pretty darn good place to have a career, but even Boeing has gone from failure to success and back to failure with essentially the same workforce. Once upon a time, Arthur Andersen was the top recruiter of accounting talent in the United States, and it still went down the tubes with Enron in a massive managerial failure.


So do the people overall, and the stars among those folks, really make the difference? Not if they aren't focused. If they come into work every day and waste their talents, then the entire debate is irrelevant. And if a business depends explicitly on having the best people, it's probably going to be in trouble longer term. Eventually the industry itself is going to fall out of favor, and all those talented people who came to the business or industry because it was hot will go elsewhere.

In contrast, the most successful companies rely on a system and a group of leaders capable of getting ordinary people to succeed consistently over time while empowering the stars to perform as expected. The risk is that if you lose half your stars because an industry is out of favor or the company is going through a tough time, or you seat that rising star next to a time-sucking dud, or worse, you have her report to a total jerk, then the ratio oh bad to good gets even worse. The bad ones never leave on their own. The good ones always have choice. As we noted in the Honeywell chapter, legendary CEO Dave Cote once said to us that he kept his stars by paying them not just for the job they did today, but for the job they would be offered tomorrow. Obviously, companies have to narrow down that small group of truly talented managers, or that strategy gets pretty expensive. But Cote did an amazing job of keeping his top talent and board, getting average folks to step up, and filtering out those who were destructive. The Honeywell Operating System was a big part of that success - perhaps because it exposed ineffective leaders earlier than they would have been exposed otherwise. Cote didn't make excuses for lousy managers; he simply got rid of them as fast as possible. The data he collected via the operating system were his guide.

When successfully applied, an effective system means that all employees show up to work every day understanding how their role contributes to the value creation engine of the firm, even if it's only a high-level understanding. This isn't just knowing how to do their job on a factory floor or in a back office but appreciating how they contribute to the goals of their team, their division, and this the aggregate enterprise. People gain this understanding only from consistent messaging and from clear, coherent incentives. But a company must also be capable of shaping and shifting the focus and the messaging over time, as the demands of the external environment are not static.

What we've found time and time again in the industrial sector is that the most successful companies thrive under a team of well-placed leaders. By "well-placed" we mean those leaders who aren't the same type across various companies, nor are they the same type throughout a successful company's lifespan. They are the leaders who have the appropriate skills for an organization's needs at the right time.

After all, no leader excels at everything. In this book we celebrate some exceptional CEOs, all of whom also had notable weaknesses. They each delivered exceptional results by maximizing the returns on their particular talents, even if some potential return was lost o as a result of their shortcomings.

It's notable that even great CEOs often begin to struggle as they get past a decade or so into their tenure at the top. Perhaps that is because their strategies don't cross over into different eras. Or maybe they just get increasingly distracted and struggle to maintain the message and focus. We've seen examples of both. The academic world has done studies on CEOs feeling isolated and disconnected and often reporting to boards of directors they characterize as dysfunctional.

All these are real signs of burnout, particularly if these CEOs lack the energy or empowerment to drive the change they see as required. In that context, it is worth noting that the worst three years of most CEO tenures seem to be their first year and the last two. The first year they often struggle to get traction with a new message, and the organization gets stuck in a "pause". The final two years they often seem to be hanging on to the organization by a thread and cease to be effective. We could probably list upward of a hundred examples of this dynamic, including some pretty famous last-inning flops from some pretty talented folks. Even folks we celebrate in this book would have been better served had they exited a year or two before they did.


