# Teaching by Example
Often the best way to learn is to teach others. The CEOs profiled here thought of themselves as teachers more than anything else, John Patterson put it best:

> Business is only a form of teaching. You teach people to desire your product; that is selling. You teach workmen to make the right product; that is manufacturing. You teach others to cooperate with you; that is organization. To succeed in business it is necessary to make the other man see things as you see them. I say as you see them - which means that you yourself must first see and believe before you can tell another.

Sol Price's protege, Jim Sinegal - an intelligent fanatic in his own right, cofounding and running [[Costco]] from 1983 to 2012 - learned from Sol Price that "if you are not spending ninety percent of your time teaching, you are not doing you job."

Focusing on teaching not only helps to develop talent. Phil Knight, founder of Nike, says sharing through teaching is "the best way to reinforce your knowledge of a subject." This book has already covered three prominent examples  of mentoring in the business world. John Patterson mentored many successful businessmen, including Thomas Watson Sr. of IBM, and Sol Price mentored Jim Sinegal, who later built [[Costco]] into a dominant wholesale retailer.  Jorge Paulo Lemann mentored the other 3G partners as well as many other partners. Those mentees grew up within their mentors' business and learned as much of the best of those business as they could. When they went on to lead or found their own companies, the CEOs drew direct experience from their mentors and often built businesses that surpassed that of their mentors. We call this the "mentor effect".

There are a number of examples of the mentor effect in the investment business. Jeffrey Gundlach worked at TCW for nearly a quarter of a century; for a number of those years he was under the successful distressed debt investor Howard Marks. After getting kicked out of TCW, in 2009, Gundlach and other former TCW employees set up a firm called DoubleLine with the backing of Howard Marks, which has grown into a highly successful firm, totaling $84 billion in assets as of the end of 2015. Other examples of mentoring in the investment world: George Soros mentored Stanley Druckenmiller Benjamin Graham mentored Warren Buffett; and Julian Robertson has mentored many of the "tiger cubs". The mentor effect is present among intelligent fanatics.
