# [[Temenos]]: History, Management, and Strategic Direction

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### I’d like to start by driving straight in to what some of the issues are, surrounding some of the narratives prevailing around the company right now. Take it as relatively known that I know enough about the company to be dangerous, at this point, but I am, by no means, an expert on it. What I’m really trying to do is reconcile the bear case narrative around it. The stock itself has gone from 160, 170 all the way back down to 70 and bounces around whatever takeover rumor that Bloomberg is running with, on a given day. There’s a lot happening.

### If you actually look at the numbers and what is going on with the US business, not all of these negative narratives seem to reconcile too well. You can argue that management is dressing this company up for sale, but you could also make the argument here that management is, perhaps, sandbagging the guidance this year. The earnings visibility is pretty good; over 80% of their revenues are known. There are good, sequential billings this year, back in the last quarterly report that they just did.

### Anecdotal feedback regarding the services is really strong and you even hear that coming from some of their cloud-native peers, like Mambu. I don’t disagree with the bears, that the US market is very tough; it’s very tough to break into. In that regard, management’s 2026 medium-term outlook factors significant wins in the US. That is something that I am really trying to get my head around here, because that is going to come down to management execution, which is going to be extremely important.

### Notwithstanding, as well, their record to date, in the US, has been patchy but now it is starting to get significantly better. When I listen to calls with Jack Henry and Fiserv, essentially, the only other non-US peer that they mention is [[Temenos]] and, generally, they mention it in a positive light, which I find interesting.

### The sell side likes to highlight all the known knowns here. But where it was priced, last week, before the most recent bounce, was pretty bombed out and wasn’t pricing a lot in the way of future expectations, around the low 70s.

### What I’m really looking for is potential blind spots, to talk to some of these narrative points as well as some insight into management; what does make this business special or not? Their win rates are phenomenal; their retention rates are phenomenal. There are some questions around culture and management efficacy. Perhaps we could kick-off regarding your background and your capacity to talk to some of these points?

I fell into the [[Temenos]] organization through an acquisition and an equity position in a company which they had acquired back in 2013. Like they normally structure their deals, they have an earnout element and a mixture of stock and cash. [[Temenos]] believes in a bit of back and sweat equity to achieve the number, so they will be a little aggressive in their deal structure. Typically, that deal with Trinovus, and all deals going forward, whether multi-funds, Kony, it doesn’t matter what, usually see that type of structure.

I can tell you, from my personal experience, when I entered the organization, there was this layer – middle-management and up – where there was a degree of loyalty and consistency, in terms of a core group of folks that had been with the company for a while. Generally, they came from Europe, to the US, and they struggled with that mixture. They saw that struggle and I will go even a little bit further back. When I was at Metavante, they had made a deal, when we had decided to take their core platform and resell it, because IBS was mainframe and we needed a more modern solution, could handle multi-currency and a few other functions for our larger clients.

FIS bought them and that created a lawsuit situation. At that exit, they obtained a few of the Metavante folks but what Robin Smith and some others struggled, through this process, was that the folks in Europe – Andreas and Mark Winterburn, who was Chief Product Officer back then – were successful already. Yes, you can give us some advice, but we’re really not going to listen to it.

When we talk about execution, and back in 2014, when we really focused on creating a model bank for the US, we had cores, we were going to enter into the community banking market, so Trinovus provided two assets. The first asset was the compliance. Having almost 2,000 institutions where we provide an outsourced compliance service, that provided the credentialling and credibility they needed. But also, with Trinovus, we had about 45 total core banking systems. The intent there was to convince those that were on the legacy Trinovus, to got to T24, at that time. Something we struggled with then and, I think, something they still struggle with, is in terms of execution. It’s not the sales. To your point, they can sell great; it’s the delivery aspect.

We invested, we got commitments and relocated about 80 engineers from our Chennai location, where everything was centralized and brought them over to Lake Mary, Florida, to work on the model bank and getting the first 10 institutions that we convinced to carry over to T24 from the legacy core, to give credibility to [[Temenos]]. A lot of us worked in the core banking world so we understood what we did and didn’t need.

The best example I can give you of where the absolute disconnect was, in the organization, was on checks. We can’t understand why we have to invest this time in checks, the minimum viable product around it and the BRD, the business requirement documents. To us, we said, you can’t; it’s not an option. In the United States, checks are still prevalent; maybe not everywhere else. This is part of the minimum viable product. Without our knowledge and because we really didn’t have centralize control in the model bank, Jay, who ran dev, out in India, killed it.

What eventually happened is it put us into some legal jeopardy, at that time. This is around 2014, 2015. We had to release those clients and those clients went to other cores.

### Which other cores did they go to, at that time?

Jack Henry, FIS, Fiserv, Silver Lake. Several went over to Horizon, on FIS. It was a mixed bag. We told them, there is no way we can support this, if you’re not going to give us the resources. After a year, they cut it and they forced us to send a letter out to all those cores saying, you have to this date, then we’re shutting the system down.

This is public knowledge and there is an article out there, from years back. It is really this disconnect with Andreas. Max is the CEO; he’s not the CEO. The guy runs the organization.

### I get that. Max was better suited to CFO.

Yes, definitely. It is partly because of his ability to interact with people and he has some medical challenges around that. We always knew what he was good for and Max could work a deal, from an acquisition perspective, like no one else.

Fast forward a little bit, what we quickly realized about Andreas’ attention span, just like the previous management that was there under Robin, then Russell Taylor came in, under North America, who came back to [[Temenos]]. I was responsible for strategy and so we did a transaction with an organization called Acceleron, who provided collections and loan origination – what they call lifecycle management – to over 1,000 Credit Unions, so brought us into the Credit Union space, but it fit into our cloud strategy.

When we did that transaction, Andreas said, we’ll just wipe out Russell and David and we’ll put Jay in there. There is this constant churn of management, in North America, which has created significant challenges. I don’t think they are publicly talking about it, but Jaqueline was forced out; Emily Steele before that. You go down the list of people and it’s hard in a sales cycle, especially when you are talking about larger deals, outside of just digital, but system of records, where there is this constant flux of leadership in North America.

They brought in Alexa for a little bit. She came in from France, ran operations and then they made her provisional president and then, eventually, she left the organization too. There was no stability.

Let me go back. One of the deals that I was involved in getting for the organization, which was a landmark deal, was Commerce Bank. It was very complex, but Commerce Bank involved a back door deal that we did with EY. EY was the vendor evaluator for Commerce. It came down to Fiserv and us, but they knew they weren’t going to get any integration or additional monies out of it. EY wanted to build a practice around [[Temenos]] because they thought we had a lot of potential.

Rob Revall who is still there, and Jan who are both partners now, took this leap of faith and, in exchange, we made a deal. They provided all the insight we needed; the pricing of what Commerce was seeing, the questions, the concerns. Our coaches were the vendor evaluators. We ended up winning that deal because of EY.

What is really shitty and says a lot about the organization, when they started, we were the vendor choice and now you are going into the commercial phase, EY presents the price – we packaged it up – and, of course, there is negotiation on pricing. It gets to Andreas, eventually and Jay Mossman is involved in it too and, we ended up screwing EY. We went with Cognizant because they were significantly less and it took off the cost pressure of us discounting T24.

To this day, that is why, globally, EY will never, ever, ever do business with [[Temenos]].

### That was a little short-sighted.

This other thing we did in [[Temenos]] – more on the license side, where we were heavily licensed and not subscription based – was look at the custom software that we were building, whether that was Banesco, for example, or some other large deals at that time. When we struggled on revenue, we would move custom code and put it into main production so we can convert professional services revenue into actual mainstream license and maintenance revenue. We had deals that we marked, that we had to shift and work around. That was a big concern.

There were delivery deals. We worked on a massive agreement with Microsoft. We were one of the first ever, globally, to go to market with them, with Azure; this is, again, about six or seven years ago. We go to market in Mexico, Nigeria, Kenya and Vietnam, with a standard market edition product. A lot of vendors do the same thing but we sold ahead of our skis a little bit.

What they don’t talk about is that the standard market edition or the inclusive banking solution is actually not entirely a [[Temenos]] solution. It is this company called Software Group, out of Bulgaria, which provides a lot of the agency banking functionality and the other pieces. That deal still exists. Andreas really didn’t want to go into the peanut side but, at that time, you have to remember that the larger institutions weren’t getting in cloud. We saw the opportunity in the cloud and we had to earn our credentialling, so we had to get in that market. He didn’t want to invest in product so we displayed like we had something, but we didn’t have something.

Those are the sort of shady things that would happen. Eventually, it took a turn in terms of a burn. You had Mark Gunning who, eventually, just left as soon as he could; Andreas’ leadership style is absolutely horrible. You’ll go to Athens, Geneva, and he will yell at you. He’s made people cry and leave the meeting room. It’s this joke that – and I’m sure you’ve talked to other people – he’s like a little Napoleon. He doesn’t command the respect. Really and truly, the glue of that company and the leadership was driven around the fact that you had your SARs.

Mine started out at CHF13 and, in a year and a half, I was up to CHF83. When I left the organization, I was at CHF140. If you look at a lot of the leadership, they were willing to take the abuse because, if you were with [[Temenos]] in 2014, 2017, 2018 and 2019, you would get those sorts of returns. That is what the glue was; it wasn’t because they, necessarily, thought it was the best platform or they were really behind Andreas’ leadership.

I don’t know if you want to know the personal part but I’ll put it all out there too. The guy was working a lot, obviously under a lot of pressure. His best friend ending up dating his wife, and they got divorced; he lost both children. Now he has got remarried and he’s out in Vancouver and Europe and bouncing and he left. After that, that finally burnt him out and so David Arnott was out.

Max took over the reins but he did not hold the inspirational piece of putting people together. That’s when you saw Gunning leave, as well as some of the key knowledge people. Ranga was another one; moved from Singapore, relocated, headed up BSG for the Americas and I think he’s at Oracle now. That was a guy that was there for 18 years.

Fast forward to now. Have you ever heard the story about Kony and when Tom – who was the CEO of Kony after acquisition – went to Madrid and what happened there?

### No.

Again, it is two key people from the Kony acquisition; Jeffery Kendall, who is the CEO of NYMBUS, and Tom. Tom and Jeffery fly over, before GSK, the general sales kick off; senior leadership comes in and has meetings. Apparently, the due diligence, in Andreas’ mind, wasn’t fully baked and they felt that some of the numbers were not being realized. Andreas felt he wanted to dress down Tom in Madrid. Tom wasn’t going to put up with it and, literally, within three months of the acquisition, Tom just left the hotel the next day, flew back and said, I’m done.

With that, you had a major talent drain in Kony. Over that period, you saw a lot of folks leaving and it was because they felt as if there was a lot of instability there. London was taking direct control. You’re probably aware of this; although Geneva is the headquarters but, really, the operational center is Fenchurch. It provided a lot of pressure. Kony wasn’t a productized solution; it was a very customized solution, from a deliverable perspective.

You had the other solution, that was Australian based and Colorado based, that provided more of the account opening processes. Then you had Kony that provided more of the digital banking experience and, together, was supposed to provide this amazing digital platform that was going to go head-to-head with Backbase, but really helped put a foot in the door for deployment in the subscription modeling perspective, in doing it in the cloud. Core might have been slower but they wanted to show progressive numbers up, and that was the strategy there.

They couldn't deliver because they were losing a lot of that knowledge base. Sales were going, but on the execution side, they were either letting people out of their contracts or delaying it or giving them concessions, and so there were a lot of operational challenges. At this time, they had Accelerant multi-fund and then they had that data center in Australia which was already reselling [[Temenos]], and then they had the account opening system, around that time they were running into major production issues of the main release for Nordea. That was huge because Nordea wasn't sold by [[Temenos]]. What really catapulted [[Temenos]] was that Nordea deal. Nordea was Emphasis, Finacle and it was [[Temenos]], but Emphasis was providing the services and backed in a $14 billion organization. Basically, Accenture had to lead it and underwrite [[Temenos]] because, at that time, [[Temenos]] was about $500 million in revenue too small.

Accenture sold the deal and the coupling of it and what they were going to provide, where they saw Finacle to be more legacy technology, but they had more confidence in the services. When Accenture backed it, it was okay, Nordea was fully on board. That created an immense amount of tension between Accenture and [[Temenos]] because [[Temenos]] would not augment outside the code development. Everything was centralized in Chennai at that time. It was providing a choke hold, because you have to remember, they are model banks right. Yes, you have the configuration but there's actually coding that's required to set up that model bank, and everything was being choked into one center, and that was a lot of the influence of Jay who ran that.

Nordea was slipping and so Accenture said, let's work past this; let's figure out if we can convince [[Temenos]] to build a center of excellence. Fast forward to just before Covid, and the final blow up is not only Nordea but there's Coventry that was the deal out in the UK, with Accenture. Accenture and [[Temenos]] get into a public fight, point fingers at each other, and now Accenture is out. Alan McIntyre, who leads global FI practice says, I'm tripling down with Finastra now; it had to be bad if they were doubling down with Finastra.

That led to the second large SI, that basically backed out. Now you have EY which will never work with them, and Accenture who might be opportunistic, but nothing strategic any more with the combination of Société Générale, Nordea and then finally the Coventry piece.

If you can get the folks from Forrester or Gartner on the side – because they do make money from them so they're not going to openly criticize them – everyone will say that [[Temenos]] are a great sales organization. Phil Barnett, one of the best people. I could tell you stories with Phil; Phil and I went after PayPal. Great guy, but when it comes to actually delivering, those are two parts of [[Temenos]]. Sales, sales execution, sales machine, pressure from Andreas, perfect. Then you have the actual running the system live, giving the client what they thought they bought and doing it within a rough estimate of time, not three times as long, in terms of delivery.

### That explains, perhaps, the 2X win rate versus other competitors in Europe. I know customer retention rates are at these levels for core, normally pretty much as industry levels, but [[Temenos]] is running 98%. I'm just wondering what is it that can be done to this business? It's obviously great on the sales front; what does it need to do to improve on the delivery front? I'm not trying to speculate here, but is this something that a would-be acquirer would be pondering, what can we do to enhance this?

Yes, and an acquirer, especially if it's a PE, would be looking at services assets in its portfolio, that it potentially could do to aggregate it, and then a restructuring of more productization, rather than customization. How do we productize? Potentially, is that a headless core; is it more of that model, so we're not trying to bite off more than we chew? We can deliver things faster, so we can recognize revenue faster. If I were a buyer of [[Temenos]] and knowing [[Temenos]], those are the things that, if someone knows that organization, they could flip it pretty quickly, and deliver an amazing return. It’s knowing all the potholes you're going to experience in advance. If you're acquiring them, and depending on the term sheet that you negotiate, now you're keeping three people that need to be out of the organization, and they're protected and they're in the organization, you're going to have those headwinds. But you're only going to know that if someone that's deep in that organization is trying to put that execution plan together.

### You should be sticking your hand up.

Yes, it's super interesting. I've had the opportunity handed to me, and it's amazing all the opportunities that exist now. I keep telling my wife I'm semi-retired now, but ever since I've said that, it's just no, you really need to do this, you really need to do that.

### It's the number one killer; you can’t do that.

Yes, but I would say, with a solid plan with that organization, you streamline it, you give a little bit more autonomy to the regions, but you create centers of excellence – the distribution model is there – and you really rationalize what you're selling in those regions. Give a true P&L in terms of people that know the regions; give them a little bit of autonomy in terms of, you have 20,000 human days of development and place your bets where you want to put them, but here are the key criteria in terms of how we're going to productize. Centrally, this is what we're looking at. When we launch these products, they can't take more than six months to build. They are shorter sprints and we know the market potential.

Take buy now pay later, whatever it is, and you're staying in that market segmentation, we understand the market well, we're going to leverage some of our assets here, put it together and go to market. I don't think [[Temenos]] thinks that way, but if it did and it regionalized, and you put those resources regionally, I think that organization would just absolutely take off.

The problem that you will have with [[Temenos]] is, in Andreas' mind, the company almost went down the tubes with Guy Dubois. When Guy Dubois – who was the CEO at that time – tried to merge [[Temenos]] with Misys, and those were two different models. Guy was fired and Arnott, who was the CFO, became the CEO. That's when Andreas came back as executive chairman. George was always in the background but, really, it was Andreas that at that point took firm hold. In Andreas' mind, he always has that bold changes, in his mind mean risk, and I think it still goes back to that 2011, 2012 time frame, when he did that transaction with Guy Dubois.

### What is Andreas' end game?

He likes the influence; he loves the platform. Money is money, but you take [[Temenos]] away from him, and then what does he do next? Sit on his yacht and go through the islands in Greece? To him, being the center of attention, TCF, GSK, having the influence to command people, I’ve got to tell you that's his thing, that's what he loves. It's so polar opposite to what George was, if you look at the initial organization. Did the organization make a lot of money with George? No, that's why there’s an Andreas, but there was never this balance between a George and an Andreas. George just liked to come in, issue the [[Temenos]] keys and stuff like that and go around and meet some people, but he would have to be forced out. It would have to be the board coming together and saying, we need a radical change; Andreas you changed management so many times, it's time to really think differently.

### Is Andreas' end game to sell this business, or does he just like being in this position?

Everything is always on the table; you have fiduciary responsibility to shareholders, so you're never going to have him openly say he's not ruling out things. At the end of the day, for him to accept a deal and not to be a hindrance, there has to be some type of position for him, where he has that influence, where he is the man.

### I'm just wondering if he would work under PE, but I guess it all comes down to the package and he will probably be made even wealthier through a PE exit anyway?

He would, but again, it's the balance. Wealth is wealth but to him, it's the influence and prestige of the platform, of being executive chairman of [[Temenos]].

### It seems to me, at a very high level, that this organization has all the sales drivers in place that it needs but perhaps you can keep Andreas in place to manage that, but you need, as you say, a balancing factor like George here to bring the organization back to what actually matters, which is looking after the customer and delivering really good product; is that fair enough?

And caring about the company. There are still some TBs, true believers out there in the company, and George was that. He was the heart and soul of the company, until finally he got pushed out. There was no one to replace him from that perspective and I think that's why you had a lot of long term Temenosians leave recently. Finally, the stock wasn't there, so the last vestiges of what kept them there no longer existed.

### Yes, and they've had to jack up the SPC on the back of that as well, particularly after those ill-timed firings during Covid.

Yes.

### We can say tick the box for sales, that's fine. I think it's a well-known known that the culture is wanting, but let's talk about their 20% outsized R&D. What I haven't got clear in my mind is whether this is producing unique or advantaged products. The win rate and retention rate is saying something.

Remember how I said Banesco is an example? That's me saying customization projects are investing into the product. when my revenues are falling short, suddenly I'm boxing something that was just meant for Banesco, and now say that I'm going to resell it. It doesn't mean someone is going to buy that damn module, but now it's added into the catalog. That was the biggest; it was laughable. It would only take an understanding on the weekly meetings with BSG, product and accounting. Why would dilution engineering on pre-sales and product, be with accounting and talking together on a weekly basis?

They spent a lot of time, way back when, that they invested in Salesforce for reporting down to the minutiae. Let's say, I sold something that was customization, and let's say, it's international letters of credit. Someone would look at a report, it would look at the customization and would see the BSG assessments to more productization fit. Then there would be the leap of product going in there and saying, with an additional investment of €100,000, this could be productized.

I am sitting here, close to the end of the quarter, and our sales are here and I need our sales here. Now I'm going okay, I'll take those buckets and move them over. I'll take credits, adjust the numbers and make it look like they're paying more but they are credited there but the TCV of the contract is still the same. I can't tell you how many times I saw that. Then you say hey, we're spending 20% on project.

### That's what I came back to too, because my concern was this is what I would call anti profit R&D. If you actually look at the numbers here, the return on research capital – which is a pretty basic computation you can do – it says to me that their R&D investments aren't leading to new sales. That's really interesting to hear your perspective on it as well. The flip side of that is, we've now talked about leadership vacuums in North America. We've talked about the issues here with product and customer relationships, but we've also got the relative cheapness of the business itself of where it's trading, right now, in lower leverage. A 20% R&D ratio is a huge opportunity again, for a would-be acquirer to slash and burn and do whatever is required here. There's a lot of fat inside that, towards the operating margin.

I think you have a lot of unrealized value. I don't want to say polishing a turd, but it's sort of polishing a turd. You do have a little bit of a challenge. I can't say the financial institution; it is one of the top 10 global financial institutions, and in consultation with Deloitte, [[Temenos]] – they had Gen3 technology, Gen2 and Gen1 – [[Temenos]] got boxed into Gen2, and the bank's directive was only Gen3. Thought Machine, 10X, Mambu, they were all included; [[Temenos]] was not. That was heavily influenced based on the report that was put by Deloitte; Deloitte is a great partner. But it's the work that they're doing in [[Temenos]] to understand where they fit to peers.

I don't know about other large financial institutions, but if they were excluded from that – and people talk and go from one global bank to another global bank – that's not good. If I were [[Temenos]], I would be very concerned the moment I was disqualified. Now I don't know; maybe they are working on it. I bet they aren't, because of the level of cockiness sometimes in that organization. But Phil Barnett is pretty sharp, and I'm sure he was involved in that opportunity; I would almost bet my bottom dollar on it. But that is more disconcerting that they are not positioned where they think they are positioned. Being at Mambu at that time, I talked to the little CIO, talked to the folks that wrote the report, and it was very insightful.

### That's interesting. Just as we go into wrapping up here, perhaps we could just touch on going back to the US, and talk to their likelihood of success in the US. Again, they haven't done a good job traditionally, but now the numbers seem to be turning around a little bit, as far as the US is concerned. The business there does seem to be accelerating, at least from a numerical perspective. Could you talk at all to what you think their likelihood of succeeding in North America is?

It really depends on the stability of that leadership. If I look at North America, their most senior technical person, Chris Chapple, he left for Thought Machine. You had five critical employees that I knew that left, right and center, could write program code, could build a demo system, could really sell the socks. Sue Laws, who heads up that area, on the critical part of the sales but basically BSG for that area, she's the only one left. I know you want to talk about US but you also have Alex Pacheco, who it wasn't Henrique that was selling. Alex went to Thought Machine. These weren't average people or average talent; they were critical talent to the success both of the sales and delivery process going to a competitor, and that goes back to the SARs.

The SARs weren't worth anything anymore so now everyone was considering and Thought Machine obviously has a ton more upside. You're asking that question in terms of growth. Could they maintain growth? That's a good question; these departures were recent. I don't see how they sustain it, because you can hire new people but no one is going to have that level of credibility, that gravitas, that experience. Chapple was a CIO at the former bank that ran [[Temenos]], and was the lead technical person for North America for 12 years. You can't lose people, and there were other people that have left too. That's what I'm trying to hammer in; it's going to be hard. [[Temenos]] doesn't have the best reputation.

### Putting aside delivery here, but that you can encompass that in your answer, is there a better owner of this business to address North America?

Is there a better owner, is that your question?

### Yes.

Yes, I think one that looks at more distribution channels. There are some legacy players; they tried to execute this deal with TXC. It's kind of producing but it's not producing. Again, I think they're more reactive than strategic, and you can't just go in with one partner. I would rather have 10 strategically placed partners in certain areas, where they're putting boots on the ground and they just need that product to fit in their ecosystem to go sell, than just one partner that's trying to sell off the entire enchilada.

If you looked at Mambu, when I was at Mambu, we were in 65 markets. I brought it down to eight markets. I can talk about this now because we're outside the window, but we were this close, prior to me leaving, for Pfizer to be a global distributor of Mambu's platform. It was between us and Finxact, and doing the Finxact deal. Those are the strategic things that you have to do, and in the markets that you leave, find distribution partners out there. Mambu didn't really exit; they just put distribution partners out there. [[Temenos]], I don't think is as bold in terms of restructuring their business to that extent. They were never big into the reseller side, and I think that killed their growth potential.

### That's interesting. We haven't talked about the largest shareholder here, Martin Ebner. I don't know if you have any particular insights into Martin, but he's pretty good at extracting value and realizing potential from businesses and also from his own individual investments over time. What's his level of influence here? What do you think he would be pushing for, behind the scenes?

At the end of the day – and I would be surprised that he's having side conversations outside of Andreas – but it's about the right portfolio coming; it's not about the cash. I think there, he has to see the same thing I see. There's a ton of untapped value here. I would be quiet about it, but I would put my game plan into place with bringing them private in 12 to 18 months, putting them back out to the public market. In that time, I know there are some things that are happening in the market. Finastra is splitting up their company into three pieces and trying to sell it. You see Oracle standing there and going okay, big cloud, big data play, but we have to do something different and make it stickier and FLEXCUBE is not doing it. Oracle has to pay up.

Salesforce has been playing with this redefining CRM and making it more of a platform beyond just customer relationship management and kind of redefining it. I think with the MuleSoft piece and open banking, that could be another leverage position. If I'm a mark, I'm looking at how can I pivot the company for my next buyer. I don't necessarily think I'm going to spin it out public. I think I'm going to find my buyer and they're going to pay a huge premium on it because I'm going to fix the shit, show the proof in the revenue in the short term, but then I'm going to take one or two things that are out there at a discount, put it together and realize a huge gain.

So you take like a Pega, something from an automation RPA, you bunch that in and start layering that into digital. Now I'm taking out opex, I'm automating more; those are bold plays. Then you just need the data space, the centralized data component. Now you have non-traditional buyers really super interested in you. If I were a mark that's how I would construct it. Play it out, put my plan together; he probably has some type of plan right now, I would assume. But put it with two to three assets, and then if it makes sense and I can extract more value, take the Finastra playbook and split out the wealth management piece, put that on the side over here, put the payments pieces over here, digital and core, and sell it.

### I think we're coming up on the hour now; thanks very much for your time; really interesting insights. I will be sure to send this transcript, along with your resume, to Thoma Bravo.

Yes, they're an interesting firm all right. They've done the most interesting deal I've ever seen in fintech. They did that deal with Intuit. They bridged a deal for, I think, four to six weeks, bought Digital Insight from Intuit when they divested it, and then sold it to NCR and made $800 million. I have a ton of respect for them.

### Wow.

That was one of the best deals I've ever seen.