# The 1960s Conglomerate Boom

## by [[Demesne Investments]]


Nowadays, the names Litton Industries, Gulf & Western, ITT, and Ling-Temco-Vought are barely more than echoes from a bygone era. In their heyday, however, they were all once sprawling conglomerates whose products ouched seemingly every corner of American industry. It was during the 1960s that these and a bevy of other similar conglomerates suddenly arose to prominence thanks to an outbreak of frenetic merger activity now known as the Conglomerate Boom.

The distinguishing feature of the 1960s Conglomerate Boom was the sudden popularity of acquiring unrelated businesses. At its feverish peak in 1968, conglomerates accounted for 84% of large acquisitions, and nearly 90% by asset value. But by the end of the decade, conglomerate merger activity abruptly collapsed, dragging their share prices along with it.

Demesne’s entire portfolio is comprised of conglomerates of some kind or another, albeit of the more uncommon decentralized variety. The Icarian ascent and subsequent fall from grace of these conglomerates is therefore acutely relevant for my investment strategy. Some investors understandably cite the Conglomerate Boom as damning evidence of the flaws of the conglomerate business model or even acquisitive corporate strategies more generally. There are indeed cautionary lessons from this period, but the incredibly diverse class of businesses that could be labeled “conglomerates” defies such oversimplified conclusions.

Rather, at least as I see it, the conglomerate strategy began from reasonable first principles that were progressively warped until the original rationale behind them was unrecognizable (is this not true of all bubbles?). This development was a natural response to certain structural incentives, regulatory chief among them, that were further amplified by the irrational exuberance that commonly besets financial markets. As a consequence, I do not think the Conglomerate Boom condemns the conglomerate model, but it does show us how not to build them: with ever larger acquisitions, leverage, and entirely unrelated diversification.

## Antitrust Policy and the Conglomerate Boom
It is impossible to give a proper explanation of the Conglomerate Boom without understanding its regulatory context, which I and many market historians would contend was the single most important factor at play. The story begins with the Celler-Kefauver Act of 1950, which intended to significantly strengthen Section 7 of the Clayton Antitrust Act. However, it took years of trial, error, and court cases to arrive at practical standards for its enforcement. It was therefore not until the 1960s that its full implications really became manifest.

In 1962, a critical Supreme Court decision was made in the case of Brown Shoe Co. vs. United States which not only interpreted the scope of Section 7 to now include smaller vertical mergers, but smaller horizontal ones too. Subsequent court cases declaring other acquisitions anticompetitive, such as United States vs. Von’s Grocery Co. in 1966 (horizontal grocery store merger) and FTC vs. Proctor & Gamble also in 1966 (in which Proctor & Gamble tried to enter into the adjacent bleach business by buying Clorox) reaffirmed the shift in policy with which the private sector had already been gradually coming to terms. The message was clear: vertical, horizontal, and even adjacent mergers were off limits. That left one viable option: unrelated diversification.

The response was an explosion of merger activity for unrelated businesses. For example, consider the case of the International Telephone & Telegraph Corporation (ITT), the largest of the diversified conglomerates of the period. Throughout the decade, ITT ventured far beyond its roots in telecommunications equipment, acquiring Sheraton (America’s largest hotel chain), Continental Bakery (America’s largest bakery, maker of Wonderbread), Rayonier (world’s largest wood pulp cellulose supplier), Grinnell (fire sprinkler systems), Hartford Insurance (a large P&C insurer), Canteen (a vending machine company), Aetna (one of America’s first health insurers), Levitt (a leading homebuilder) and many more. ITT was the poster-child of the zeitgeist, but its acquisition activity was entirely typical for the group. To say that these companies’ acquisition activities were characterized by “unrelated businesses” would be an understatement. They were entirely disparate businesses whose conglomeration lacked any discernable rhyme or reason. Additionally, capital markets became all too eager to finance the acquisitions, which led to increasingly larger takeover targets. Acquisitions of iconic brands and businesses whose description began with “America’s largest...” became the norm.

It was not too long before regulators began to recognize that they had a problem on their hands. The swelling conglomerates had been creeping further into more regulated industries. Concerns also arose over anticompetitive practices like subsidizing the losses of one subsidiary with another to drive competition out of business. In July 1968 (the peak of the Conglomerate Boom), the FTC announced that it would undertake an “In-Depth Investigation of Conglomerate Merger Movement”, which was released the following year. They were not alone. A speech given by SEC Commissioner Richard Smith in 1969 summarizes the broad-based scrutiny that had quickly arisen:
> Most of the alphabet agencies of the government are faced currently with the phenomenon: not just the FTC and SEC, but as conglomeration has reached into the regulated industries, also the FCC, the CAB, the FRE and the ICC. The Justice Department is taking a renewed look at the development and the Treasury and Comptroller are concerning themselves with bank involved conglomeration... Congress - both houses - have had their interest and concern aroused. I believe it is four separate committees of the House that have held or called hearings on one or another aspect of conglomerates. The Senate committees have also been active.

1969 brought a new administration (Nixon’s) and regulators eager to make their mark. In June of the same year, John Mitchell, the new Attorney General, effectively declared war on conglomerate mergers in a speech before the Georgia Bar Association, to be followed later with suits against ITT, Ling-Temco-Vaught, and Northwest Industries. Those suits turned out to have only mixed success, but the more antagonistic stance of the government was clearly enough to take the wind out of the conglomerate sails. 

If there was any remaining doubt that antitrust policy was the tail wagging the 
Conglomerate Boom dog, one need only look further ahead to the 1980s.
With the arrival of the much more lenient Reagan administration, vertical and horizontal merger activity were effectively given the green light. Thus began another M&A wave, perhaps best symbolized by the “corporate raider” strategy of hostile acquisitions. Ironically, the conglomerates that came of age in the 1960s proved especially attractive targets for hostile acquirers and activists who figured they were more valuable broken up. Many conglomerates independently came to the same conclusion and aggressively dismantled themselves. All told, about half of the unrelated acquisitions of the Conglomerate Boom were eventually divested.

## Pooling-of-Interests Accounting and the Financials Landgrab
Antitrust policy may have provided the pivotal catalysts for the rise (and decline) of the Conglomerate Boom, but it was amplified into a full-blown stock market bubble with help from the usual suspects: promotional management teams, a self-serving Wall Street, celebrity CEOs, breathless validation from the management “sciences”, and an exuberant surge in interest by the public. The nascent mutual fund industry, which was
democratizing access to the stock market, quadrupled assets during the decade!

Accounting gimmickry, another classic bubble inflator, also played its part, but deserves special mention for two reasons. A legal but critically flawed accounting standard for mergers known as the pooling-of-interests method played a critical part on three very related fronts. First, this standard exploited investors’ over-reliance on reported earnings (and P/E multiples), which it inflated. Second, because acquisitions generated this inflated income, it incentivized weaker underwriting standards by acquisitive conglomerates. Third, it incentivized conglomerates to buy businesses with assets that could be sold off piecemeal, culminating in the Conglomerate Boom’s distinctive landgrab for insurance and other financial companies in its final stages.

Under the pooling-of-interests method, the assets and liabilities of an acquired company are simply added together line-by-line with those of the acquiring company. It is simply a summation of book values. However, acquisitions are almost always purchased for more than their book value, often far more. This premium over the book value is obviously a significant cost. Yet under the pooling-of-interests method, there is no avenue for this cost to flow through the income statement.

This has two immediate implications. First, because the costs of acquisitions are never reflected in the income statement, reported earnings can only increase so long as the acquiree is profitable, regardless of the price paid for the acquisition. Second, it means that the net assets of the acquired companies are almost always marked below fair value when they are consolidated into the acquiring company’s balance sheet.

For an investment audience that valued businesses primarily on price-to-earnings multiples (as was the case in the 1960s), it’s easy to see how this accounting methodology encouraged earnings “growth” by acquisition. Further still, acquirors could manufacture earnings as needed by subsequently selling off assets piecemeal. Because those assets had been put on the books at historic book value rather than fair value, those asset sales generated investment income that contributed even further to earnings. Flipping assets in this way is not a bad strategy per se, but the pooling-of-interests method concocted investment income that was not offset by any of the actual costs to acquire them. In other words, these investment gains were clearly overstated.

As a result, the pooling-of-interests method not only incentivized undisciplined underwriting, but also a certain kind of acquisition target. The most attractive were those businesses with a multitude of separable assets that could subsequently be sold off as needed to manufacture illusory income.

For example, as laid out in Blair (1972)16, Gulf & Western’s primary motivation for its 1966 acquisition of Paramount Pictures was its library of movies, whose crown jewels were sold off for short-sighted investment income not long after purchase. Because accounting standards also dictated that marketable securities be held on the books at cost, companies that owned substantial securities portfolios were even more obvious targets. This was the case with Gulf & Western’s acquisition of New Jersey Zinc, a zinc miner that happened to also have a $35 million securities portfolio.

Eventually, the conglomerates stumbled upon the ideal acquisition target to maximize this loophole: insurance, banking, and other similar financial companies. Thanks to their huge portfolios of liquid and substantially appreciated securities (which were nonetheless held at historical cost), financial companies were essentially “earnings piggybanks”. Whenever some earnings needed to be manufactured, they could simply sell off appreciated securities and report investment income for the year, even if the fair value of those securities had declined over the same period18. As can be seen below, insurance companies, banks, and other financial companies became quite popular at the very peak of the Conglomerate Boom.

| Acquirer              | Acquired                            | Year |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ---- |
| City Investing        | Home Insurance                      | 1968 |
| Gulf & Western        | Capitol Life Insurance              | 1968 |
| Gulf & Western        | Providence Washington Insurance     | 1968 |
| Gulf & Western        | Associates Investment               | 1968 |
| ITT                   | Aetna Finance                       | 1968 |
| ITT                   | Thorp Finance                       | 1968 |
| ITT                   | Hartford Insurance                  | 1969 |
| Leasco                | Reliance Insurance                  | 1968 |
| Leasco                | Chemical Bank                       | 1969 |
| Ling-Temco-Vought     | Greatamerica Corp                   | 1967 |
| NationalGeneral Corp. | Great American Insurance Group      | 1968 |
| Teledyne              | United Insurance Company of America | 1968 |
| Teledyne              | Argonaut Insurance                  | 1968 |
| Teledyne              | Fireside Thrift                     | 1968 |


Initially, it seemed incredible to me that such unsophisticated accounting gimmicks could be used to such devastating effect. After all, today’s accounting standards, though improved, still suffer similar shortcomings. Today, acquired assets are consolidated at fair value and a line item called “goodwill” is recorded on the balance sheet to reflect the premium paid for an acquisition in excess of its book value. However, goodwill is still not amortized on the balance sheet, so the full cost of an acquisition will still never flow through the income statement. Nevertheless, investors still routinely manage to differentiate between one-time accounting gains and normal income. Accountants, short-sellers, and curmudgeons still complain about the shortcomings of the current standards, but it seems to me a minor quibble when investors have easy access to the cash flow statement where the full cash costs of acquisitions are on clear display. Personally, I’ll take a record of the actual cash outflows over a non-cash expense based on an arbitrary amortization schedule any day.

My view depends critically on the assumption that investors have access to a cash flow statement. However, the cash flow statement as we know it today was not mandated until 1987. A cruder requirement to include a “sources and uses of funds” was still only in effect beginning in 1973. Annual reports from the 1960s have proven difficult to track down, but I was able to find an archived copy of Gulf & Western’s 1967 Annual Report. Lo and behold, no cash flow statement is to be found there. By recognizing that investors of that era were usually deprived of a cash flow statement (as well as a number of other detailed disclosures that modern investors take for granted), it becomes a lot easier to understand their singular and seemingly naive focus on reported earnings and susceptibility to deceptions like pooling-of-interests
accounting. However, our improved accounting methods and disclosures should not lull us into a false sense of security. One need not look any farther than the recent implosion of General Electric as a reminder that aggressive expansion into credit and insurance businesses continues to tempt and trip up bloated conglomerates.

## Diamonds in the Rough of the Conglomerate Model
For all that went wrong with the conglomerates of the 1960s, it would be easy to overlook what they had right. There is no denying, for example, that merger synergies not only exist but can create significant value. The catch, as I have consistently argued in Demesne’s letters, is that they come at a cost. The more aggressive the synergy plan, the greater the risk of bureaucracy, compromised accountability, and general disruption to the business. Similarly, every investor understands that a prudent investment portfolio has some level of diversification, but that the marginal benefits of diversification decline with the incremental holding. The same could be said of a
conglomerate’s “portfolio”.

The Conglomerate Boom became a Conglomerate Stock Market Bubble because ebullient investors and management teams forgot that there is no free lunch. Moreover, synergy and diversification, each with their own internal tradeoffs, are also in tension with each other. The more two businesses are different, the fewer the opportunities for synergies between them. In theory, the ideal is to find a happy medium such that the conglomerated businesses are similar enough to enjoy some modest forms of synergy while also benefitting from the robustness that comes with sufficient diversification. Initially, this was indeed how some of the 1960s conglomerates began. Consider for example, the FTC’s description of Litton Industries’ initial wave of merger activity:
> “Litton’s first wave of acquisitions was composed of small electronic firms which specialized in particular segments of this greatly expanding industry. Probably the greatest contribution that these companies made to Litton’s success was to bring creative personnel together.”

In other words, Litton’s early acquisitions were thematically similar and the synergies between them were less about aggressive cost savings and more about fostering collaboration and entrepreneurialism amongst their family of businesses. Regular readers of these letters should immediately recognize these as the central recurring themes of Demesne’s decentralization thesis.


## Lessons for Demesne
To summarize, here are the major takeaways for Demesne’s research process covered in this letter:
• **Beware Very Large Acquisitions**. Just because a company can be acquired, does not mean it should. Large acquisitions statistically have the poorest track records and seem to be motivated more by ambition than sober thinking.
• **Regulatory Policy**. Shifts in regulatory policy can create unintended consequences for acquisitive companies, sometimes slowly and other times all of a sudden. Is the company in question somehow exploiting a regulatory loophole (intentionally or unintentionally)? Have there been any shifts in the winds of antitrust enforcement?
• **Incentives of Accounting Standards**. Accounting standards are supposed to paint a neutral picture of a company’s financial health, but in practice can fuel a vicious cycle of perverted incentives. Do investors have enough disclosures to see through counterintuitive accounting standards? Have recent changes made a company’s
financials appear artificially stronger?
• **Beware the Drift into Financials**. There is nothing wrong with the business model of banks, insurers, or other credit-like institutions, but in clumsy and covetous hands, they become combustible sources of hidden leverage and risk. Be especially vigilant for these acquisitions when they happen in more mature conglomerates.
• **Diversification is Not a Business Strategy**. Diversification has its benefits, but those benefits face diminishing marginal returns. Significant heterogeneity in a conglomerate only works if it can consistently acquire below intrinsic value because the lack of
specialization makes it much harder to create it.
• **Synergy vs. Diversification**. Synergy and diversification are naturally in tension with each other. The earlier and more constructive acquisition strategy of the  conglomerates struck a healthy balance between the two.

## Closing Thoughts
The lessons above are merely rules of thumb, not rules etched in stone. Markets are complex multivariate systems. A single indicator, red flag, or smoke signal can easily be rendered irrelevant in the face of other factors. A subtle difference can make all the difference. For example, consider the case of a struggling textile company named [[Berkshire Hathaway]], which came under the control of a young hedge fund manager named [[Warren Buffett]] in 1965, right in the thick of the Conglomerate Boom. Two years later, [[Berkshire Hathaway]] purchased National Indemnity, which was not only entirely unrelated to textiles, but an insurance company to boot. To make matters worse, it was purchased at the height of the insurance landgrab - a triple red flag. However, whereas the 1960s conglomerates wanted to liquidate the portfolios of acquired insurers to manufacture artificial income, Buffett had the novel insight to use insurance float as a cheap source of funds that he could prudently allocate further into cheap equities (and eventually wholly owned companies). By the end of the 1970s, [[Berkshire Hathaway]] had fully embraced the diversified conglomerate model, owning such disparate companies like Blue Chip Stamps, Wesco, See’s Candies, the Buffalo Evening News, Precision Steel, and more. An investor who had slavishly followed the lessons I listed above would have foregone one of the greatest investment track records of all time. 

Another salient example is that of Teledyne, whose long-term shareholder returns are depicted on the next page. Ostensibly, Teledyne was a posterchild of all the behavior that was supposedly discredited when the tide of the Conglomerate Boom receded. However, taking a step back from the 1960s for a more expansive view reveals the Conglomerate Boom to be but a blip on the screen of spectacular long-term performance. Perhaps that can be attributed to the singular brilliance of Teledyne’s longtime founder and CEO, Henry Singleton (whom Buffett famously admired). Or maybe it had something to do with Teledyne’s radically decentralized structure (a trait it shared with [[Berkshire Hathaway]]).
Whatever the case, despite all the flak that the 1960s conglomerates have received, this chart also shows that the Teledyne peer group still outperformed the S&P 500 by a full 360 basis points, a significant spread considering the time horizon (even if it pales in comparison to Teledyne’s). Executives like Buffett and Singleton are undeniably special, but perhaps the long-term base rate of even the less admired conglomerates reveals something special about the potential of the model itself, especially in the right hands? 

I bring up these counterpoints not to disown my own conclusions on the conglomerate model (which I still stand by) or suggest an answer to the age-old jockey vs. horse debate. Rather, they are reminders that investing is not a craft for those who crave certainty. The best an investor can hope to do is identify reasonably reliable patterns as a guide for investment discipline, while tempering it with the dexterity to judge each case on its own merits.