# The Information that matters

Zak and I run a single partnership that has long-term investments in the shares of, for all that matters, ten companies, all paid for with cash. We own the investment advisor that manages the partnership and, ordinarily, we are closed to incremental subscriptions and so free of marketing obligations. That's it. It is terribly, terribly simple, but it is not easy. It is not easy because there are so many distractions: new items, the soap opera of the stock market, macro-economic events, politics, currencies, interest rates, principal/agent temptations, regulation, compliance, administration and so on - this list is not exhaustive!
It is all too easy to make things more complicated than they need to be or, to invert, it is not easy to maintain discipline. One trick that Zak and I use when sieving the data that passes over our desks is to ask the question:

**Does any of this make a meaningful difference to the relationship our businesses have with their customers?**

This bond (or not!) between customers and companies is one of the most important factors in determining long-term business success. Recognizing this can be very helpful to the long-term investor.

For example, what investors needed to understand, and attribute sufficient weight to, in order to hold Colgate Palmolive shares for the last thirty years, and so enjoy the fifty-fold uplift in share price, was the economics of incremental products (often referred to as "line extensions", from the first "Winterfresh" blue minty gel in 1981 to "Total Advanced Whitening" today) and the psychology of advertising. Other items were important too, discipline in capital spending in particular, and there were lots of other things that seemed important along the way (stock market crises, country crises, management crises and so on) but it was the success and economics of line extensions and advertising that, in our opinion, was what the long-term investor really needed to embrace..

A similar story can be told at [[Nike]] and Coca-Cola (manufacturing savings funneled into dominant advertising) or [[Walmart]] and [[Costco]] (scale savings shared with the customer). Recognizing and correctly weighing this information in spite of the latest news flow is a matter of discipline, and it is that discipline that is so richly rewarded in the end.

The simple deep reality for many of our firms is the virtuous spiral established when companies keep costs down, margins low and in doing so share their growing scale with their customers. In the long run this will be more important in determining the destination for our firms than the distractions of the day. Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon, made the following point in a recent interview in Wired magazine:

>*There are two way to build a successful company. One is to work very, very hard to convince customers to pay high margins (Colgate, [[Nike]], Coca-Cola, ...). The other is to work very, very hard to be able to offer customers low margins (the [[Walmart]], [[Costco]], Air Asia, Amazon, [[Asos]] model). They both work. We're firmly in the second camp. It's difficult - you have to eliminate defects and be very efficient. but it's also a point of view. We'd rather have a very large customer base and low margins than a small customer base and higher margins.*

Although Mr Bezos does not mention it, one reason he prefers Amazon to be a large company with small margins is that if he shares the efficiency benefits that come with growth with his customers, he turns size, frequently an anchor on business performance, into an asset. In other words, the moat surrounding the firm deepens as the firm grows. So, having shared low costs with their customers, how are our firms' relationships with their customers going? One way to look at this is revenue growth. The weighted average revenue growth of Nomad's firms is currently over thirty percent per annum. Note: this is organic growth with, if anything, falling prices and no acquisitions in a time of austerity and little economic growth. It would appear to us that the company-customer relationship is in rude health. That's the cash in. And the cash out? Keeping it simple again: return on capital at Nomad's firms is over twice that of competing businesses.

