# The Importance of Business Systems

There are real-world dynamics in our case studies. Each company we highlighted was faced with a unique set of problems, and each went down a unique path. Some did it with brilliant success, some with fantastic failure, and some with a mix of each. The data on the successful cases kept pointing us to three common drivers: a relentless discipline on costs, cash flow, and capital deployment.

The companies that rose to the topi in our study used their high and growing cash flows to widen the moat within their existing businesses while gravitating investments to higher-return opportunities - and repeated these actions over and over. At that point, the power of compounding takes over and we get on the flywheel. Entire business books have already been written on this topic. But too many companies miss the point. They focus cost-cutting on the easy stuff, quick an abrupt fixes versus more cadenced and sustainable actions. We've seen more "one-time" restructurings in our careers that we can count. On the capital deployment side, "game-changing" acquisitions are far more frequent than a more disciplined and repeatable cash reinvestment strategy. These companies don't get themselves on the flywheel; instead they spin themselves out of it.

The most successful companies emphasise systems and processes over quick fixes, systems that incentivise and drive continuous improvement throughout the organization over an extended period of time. that almost always means being an excellent manufacturer, using tools such as Lean Manufacturing. We've never come across a company that was bad at manufacturing and still managed to succeed in the long run. Those who manufacture brilliantly can get away with a lot of missteps. Those who do poorly have to rely on top-notch product development with increasingly impossible consistency. Or they have to do a lot of great M&A deals to overshadow the underlying weaknesses. But a slow couple of years or a couple of bad deals, and you're in trouble.

Operational excellence is absolutely critical to success. In almost every business case we've studied, success over the longer term is more often a function of factory floor excellence than of product differentiation. It's that excellence  that drives above-average margins and the related outsized cash generation. Whether that cash is reinvested internally or levered through M&A doesn't matter, as long as the returns are high enough to stay on the flywheel. But without that cash flow, a company eventually falters, falling further behind peers each and every day. Said a different way, modest product differentiation isn't considered a game changer by nearly any real customer base. So unless the product differentiation is rather large, manufacturing cost and quality will reign supreme. This was a hard-learned lesson for industrials during their darker era, when globalization began to expose flaws. The ones that failed usually learned that lesson too late.

Lean manufacturing is the most common system on the factory floor. The principles of Lean originated with Henry Ford's revolutionary Model T assembly line in the 1900s, but it was honed and popularized by Toyota in the 1980s.  At its core, Lean seeks to eliminate waste in the production process. Done right, the result is faster development times to meet hard-to-predict customer demand, lower inventory levels, and higher product quality (fewer defects) - all of which lead to higher cash flow and profit margins. Of course, successful Lean companies get the benefit of free capacity as factory productivity typically improves at some level, often 2 percent per year or more, driving returns on capital higher in proportion to the intensity of the effort. Lean has grown far beyond the factory floor with inspirations throughout the entire organization. Even software developers have their own version.

There are other systems and tools (eg, Six Sigma for quality control; economic value added, or EVA, for return focus), but none are as time-proven and comprehensive as Lean. The strongest industrial cultures that we have seen are Lean based, and the ones most committed to continuous improvement are Lean based. It's a tremendous focusing tool with very clear and measurable targets. And publicly available data sets help to continually dial in what exactly best in class looks like, with more than enough consultants out there to get anyone pointed in the right direction.

That doesn't mean just throwing money into a modernised factory. That can work for a while, but without some serious discipline, it can become a giant money pit and certainly does not differentiate from competitors with similarly deep pockets. Instead it is those with the most productive systems, those who practice continuous improvement and build culture through actions and incentives, that sustain success. Those are the ones we characterise as having factory floor excellence at a differentiated level. These companies are almost always far along the Lean manufacturing journey, and they benchmark internally and externally to best-in-class organizations.

The best of the best go beyond the factory floor. They apply systematic tools to all their functions, including R&D, sales, purchasing, distribution, and back office. [[Danaher]], for instance, customized the Toyota Production System and created (or borrowed) more than a dozen tools to focus its employees. Each function has its own toolkit and is empowered to lever that toolkit to its fullest. Increasingly, we see these best-in-class organizations also utilize metrics around employee engagement and turnover. They focus as much on filtering out bad managers as they do on elevating good ones. The same principle holds true for those providing services rather than physical goods, or even software, healthcare, and other high-margin type offerings. The companies with continuous improvement cultures win out almost every single time. In the short term, "new economy" firms might neglect operations to maximize innovation or the customer base, but we see this as a mistake. The earlier a company can adopt Lean and embed a continuous improvement culture, the greater that company's odds of long-term success.

And it applies more broadly. We like to use sports analogies because they can have such amazing real-world relevance for businesses - particularly when it comes to studying teams who effectively use systems to help drive a culture of winning and comparing them with those who don't. Teams often have sharply different budget constraints. In baseball, we see this dynamic with the Yankees and Red Sox versus the Oakland A's and Tampa Bay Rays, etc. - where massive payroll differences between big-market and small-market teams bracket the top five from the rest (30 total teams). Yet, on average, the team with the sixth highest payroll has won the World Series over the past 25 years, including relative long shots like the Kansas City Royals in 2015 (thirteenth payroll rank) and Florida Marlins in 2003 (twenty-fifth payroll rank). A top-5 spender wins only half the time, driving home the point that big money hardly guarantees championships.

The General Electric chapters bring this exact dynamic in life. GE was on top of the world, winning in nearly every regard, but it eventually took winning for granted and stopped focusing on the little things. GE left its factories to starve, completely losing its cost focus, and had to make increasingly large financial bets to hide its decline. All while Honeywell and [[Danaher]] did the opposite and became two of the most respected companies in America. All three had deep pockets, all three could "buy" victories, but one failed famously.

To drive home this point even further, look at one of the toughest manufacturing businesses in America: automotive parts. It is a poster child for hyper-competition and demanding customers. History shows countless failures, and each economic down cycle seems to add more names to the list. But the ones that survived and thrived (the top 10 percent) have done so by investing in fully scaled manufacturing facilities, levering the best in robotics and automation technology. These are typically placed in strategic locations with a great cost base, close proximity to the customer, or both. They implement Lean manufacturing with enthusiasm and consistently benchmark to best-in-class  companies well outside the auto world. They work on iterative product enhancements, solving small but important customer problems. They build cost-focused cultures, fully accepting the reality of their stingy customer base. They practice extreme customer service, knowing that it's hard to differentiate on product alone.


The ones that have remained disciplined have been rewarded with growth and margins well above the average. Their excellence also makes it hard for new entrants to get traction. In fact, their excellence leads to decreased competition, as those who can't keep up eventually drop out. And with outsized cash generated, these companies are able to remain committed to their factories assets while also allowing capital to find other efficient investments.

The lesson here is that even the worst businesses have examples of successful winners. Just as the best businesses, like software and the internet, have examples of failures. The commonalities are pretty clear, and it's rarely about having a uniquely disruptive product offering or someone else beating you to that next big thing. Instead, it's all about doing the little things right, with systems in place to ensure consistent focus, even as leadership changes or business conditions swing.

To get people to actually use a system, companies have needed effective leaders - first to commit the organization as a whole decisively to the system, which means excluding all the other seemingly attractive initiatives that get in the way, and then to promote and demonstrate that system relentlessly. Done right, the result is an organization that goes to work every day knowing what to work on. Done wrong, people learn to game the system, and the organization stops focusing on adding value for customers. The [[Danaher]] Business System may be the clearest example of the former. The Honeywell Operating System is another great example. These are world class business systems that relentlessly focused their employees on adding value for the long term, and they are systems worth studying.

Business systems also help organizations focus on the main tenet of creating value. They focus on a simple question: What does the customer actually value, and how do we supply that at the lowest possible cost? Note that we day what does the customer actually value, not what you want the customer to value. That's basic stuff, but only half the companies that we have studied live that baseline principle with any real discipline. Voice of the customer is an important tool that is increasingly being adopted by the best companies to drive that very conversation. It's another way of driving focus - as long as you are actually listening to the customer in the spirit of "two ears, one mouth."

We've talked a lot about business systems in this book, largely because business tools like Lean manufacturing help an organization to find success at the very least on two of the most critical success drivers: costs and cash. But setting up a business  system is hard work and takes amazing patience.  You can't just copy the [[Danaher]] Business System; the very point of DBS is continuous improvement. Even if someone tried to copy it, it would already be an outdated version. However, the best practices are clear. Keep it simple: find what is critical to your organization's success, and then measure and compensate around those metrics. The payoff can be big. The flywheel effect itself assures some level of success, and if proper focus is maintained, it can be quite powerful. And whether you are running a company, searching for a better employer, or looking for investments, it's relevant for each.