# The Nature of Comparative Advantages

There are, perhaps, few things finer than the pleasure of finding out something new. Discovery is one of the joys of life and, in our opinion, is one of the real thrills of the investment process. The cumulative learning that results leads to what Berkshire Hathaway Vice-Chairman Charlie Munger calls "*worldly wisdom*".

Worldly wisdom is a good phrase for the intellectual capital with which investment decisions are made and, at the end of the day, it is the source of any superior investment results we may enjoy. So, when analyzing a firm, one just knows one is on to a good thing when one learns something new and the penny finally drops. And many times more fortunate if that insight can be applied more generally across businesses.

Take, for example, a recent research trip to a Welsh insurance company. The firm's products are nothing special, primary auto insurance sold to customers who buy mainly due to the legal requirement to be insured on the public roads. There is little product differentiation across the industry and the customer purchase decision is usually driven by price. This is a soul-less relationship: it is near on impossible to get customers to love their insurance companies and, for their part, insurance companies don't give the impression they love their customers much either. Be that as it may, the firm we visited has a wonderful track record of financial results going back decades. Not just good by insurance industry standards (a low hurdle to jump if ever there was one), but good by any standards. So, what is going on?

It is tempting when analyzing such situations to look for the big thing the firm does right. In effect, one is looking for the smoking gun that explains the firm's success. A smoking gun may be a vivid image, but the world does not always work like that. I should have known better when I asked what big idea had led to the firm's success. "*No, no, Nick, there is no secret sauce here*", one senior executive explained, "*we don't do one thing brilliantly, we do many, many things slightly better than others*". I have heard that line frequently over the last twenty or so years, and I have always dismissed it as a fig leaf covering the lack of any real corporate advantage. And I think that all this time I may have been wrong.

Take Costco Wholesale: Costco's advantage is its very low-cost base, but where does that come from? Not from low-cost land, or cheap wages or any one big thing but from a thousand daily decisions to save money where it need not be spent. This saving is then returned to customers in the form of lower prices, the customer reciprocates and purchases more goods and so begins a virtuous feedback loop. The firm's advantage starts with 147'000 employees and 566 warehouses making multiple daily decisions regarding $68 billions of annual costs. It's thousands of people caring about thousands of things a little more, perhaps, than may occur at other retailers. No fig leaf here. When Zak and I met Jim Sinegal, Costco's CEO, Jim suddenly stopped in mid-sentence, his face lit up, "*I must show you this*" he said and disappeared into a filling cabinet. He emerged with a memo from 1967 written by [[Sol Price - Retail Revolutionary and Social Innovator]]. "*here you can have a copy of this*", he said, and that copy is framed on our office wall. The memo says this, 

>*Although we are all interested in margin, it must never be done at the expense of our philosophy. Margin must be obtained by better buying, emphasis on selling the kind of goods we want to sell, operating efficiencies, lower markdowns, greater turnover, etc. Increasing the retail prices and justifying it on the basis that we are still "competitive" could lead to a rude awakening as it has with so many. Let us concentrate on how cheap we can bring things to the people, rather than how much the traffic will bear, and when the race is over Fed-Mart will be there.* 

This is the best summary of the business case for [[Scale Economics Shared]] we have come across.

Forty three years later, almost to the day, and Costco is the most valuable retailer of its type in the world. Cultures that care about the little things all the time are very hard to create and, in the opinion of Amazon.com founder Jeff Bezos, almost impossible to create if not put in place at the firm's genesis. (It may worth noting that, in contrast, most businesses cut costs sporadically, often in response to a crisis, as part of plan B as it were. With their backs to the wall, good costs (investment spending) may be cut as well as bad costs (bloat), with the result that the savings prove counter-productive in the long run). The Welsh insurance company was founded by a man who care passionately about the little savings, and he institutionalized this orientation into the culture of the firm from the beginning. It was the way they lived; it was part of their raison d'etre. It was plan A. And they shared that saving with their customers. Although I was slow to grasp the point, the insurance firm's advantage was very similar to that which had built Costco and builds Amazon today.

My mistake in not recognizing that these businesses share similar roots might be termed by psychologists as a "*framing*" error. When looking for an explanation to a situation the brain tends to latch on to what can be easily found to "frame" the situation, and if what is easily found is also vivid, then the brain stops looking for another explanation. I had gone looking for what I thought ought to be there, a vivid smoking gun such as a brand name, a location, a clever re-insurance contract, or a patent. However, there is no a priori reason why a comparative advantage should be one big thing, any more than many smaller things. Indeed, an interlocking, self-reinforcing network of small actions may be more successful than one big thing. Let me explain.

Take a one-big-thing-firm, such as a drug company, for example. A successful drug firm does not need to be particularly good at marketing, manufacturing, or research and development for that matter if, through a patent, it has a legal monopoly on a drug. But just look, if you will, at how fragile the drug company ecosystem is. A rival could displace it at any time with a better chemical and the firm would be left with little to fall back on, certainly not marketing, R&D, and manufacturing. Its period of exceptional profitability may therefore be quite finite and the big drug firms wrestle with the issue today.

Contrast this with a scale economics shared business: To a better incumbent's cost base a rival would have to be superior at, not one thing, but a million little actions - a far harder task. Amazon's letter to shareholders this year contains the following section:

>*We believe that focusing our energy on the controllable inputs to our business is the most effective way to maximize our financial outputs over time... we've been using this same annual goal setting process for many years. For 2010, we have 452 detailed goals, with owners, deliverable and targeted completion dates*.


At Amazon one employee initiative to remove the light bulbs from the vending machines saves the firm $20'000 per annum! At the Welsh insurance company the penny dropped: firms that have a process to do many things a little better than their rivals may be less risky than firms that do one thing right because their future success is more predictable. They are simply harder to beat. And if they are harder to beat then they may be very valuable businesses indeed.
