# The Robustness Ratio

At the risk of boring some readers, it may be worth completing the analysis of Costco here by introducing the robustness ratio. The robustness ratio is a framework we use to help think about the size of the moat around a company. it is the amount of money a customer saves compared to the amount earned by shareholders. this ratio is more appropriate for some companies than others, the prime criteria being that the customer proposition is based on price, such as exists at Costco, as opposed to an advertising-reinforced purchase such as Nike Trainers.

In the Berkshire Hathaway annual report this year, the chairman tells us that Geico policyholders saved $1bn on their policies compared to the next cheapest carrier. It also turns out that Geico earned around $1bn as well. So that's one dollar saving to the customers and one dollar retained for shareholders. At Costco we think the customer saving is around five dollars, compared to shopping at most supermarkets, for every dollar retained by the company.

So what? Well, it is probably fair to argue that the higher the ratio, the harder it would be to compete against Costco on a like for like basis. Also, a higher ratio may imply a somewhat inequitable distribution of system rewards between customer and shareholder than a lower ratio. There is a tension here between the size of the moat on the one hand and the distribution of rewards on the other. In the last few years, the pendulum has swung in favor of the customer, with the result that the stock is cheap enough to be vulnerable to a leveraged buyout (completely unobserved by Wall Street where only one in five analysts rate the stock a buy, which solves for the shares being cheap enough to fund a buy out in the first place - the two are of course linked). This is a huge source of risk for current shareholders since being taken out at a low-price amounts to theft. It's that serious, and you can rely upon us to see it that way. We think the board understands this, and the way to bet is that the pendulum will swing back in favor of the shareholders over the next few years. Look around you. How many companies save five dollars for their customers for every one dollar they keep?

It does not happen in the investment industry where fees can be levied regardless of performance - that's not much of a robustness ratio and does not take into account the asymmetry of the risks involved. You can't lose money shopping at Costco, but you can investing. This would argue that robustness ratios need to be much higher in the investment industry than for normal businesses to compensate for the risks involved. We have tried to some extent to account for this asymmetry through Nomad's six percent performance hurdle. It is not perfect, there is no science behind the number, although it is meant to represent a generous proxy for deposit rates. And besides having a hurdle rate helps us sleep at night.