# The Disguises of Short-Termism
## by [[Demesne Investments]]

In my [[A Study in Decentralization |last letter]], I discussed the many long-term advantages enjoyed by
decentralized businesses, especially considering the pitfalls of the alternative.

In this letter, I want to explore the ways in which decentralization goes hand- in-hand with long-term thinking by touching on two such businesses, [[TransDigm]] and Premium Brands. As we shall see, these companies exhibit behavior that might appear unorthodox, but is a direct consequence of the long-term thinking fostered by a culture of decentralization. 

For those unfamiliar with these companies, [[TransDigm]] is a designer and producer of highly engineered aerospace parts with high aftermarket content. Its many business units are the sole source providers for a wide variety of products which include seat belts, latches, cockpit components, actuators, ignition systems, and many, many more. If it’s a plane, it probably has [[TransDigm]] parts in it. The company expects to generate somewhere around $6.2B in sales in its 2020 fiscal year (ending in September) and at the time of this writing, has a market capitalization of roughly $35B. 

Premium Brands, on the other hand, is a Canadian producer and distributor of specialty foods. Their customers include grocery stores, gas stations, convenience stores, and foodservice operators. They sell a large portfolio of products skewed towards protein such as beef jerky, sausages, and deli meats from their own extensive stable of brands (though they also have carb-based products like pasta and baked goods). In addition, Premium Brands makes private label and unbranded products, like the sandwiches at Starbucks or the bread at supermarkets. The company expects to report ~C$3.6B in 2019 sales and has a market capitalization of approximately C$3.4B.

At first glance, these companies could not seem more different. What similarity is there between cockpit controls and beef jerky? Yet both hold views on cost restructurings that are both unconventional and strikingly similar:

### Premium Brands CEO George Paleologou, 2019 Q3 Earnings Call:
>We're not a consolidator. We don't make decisions that are driven by costs. We make decisions driven by value. Being entrepreneurial is part of our strength, part of our point of difference. At times, we can sit back and say, “Yes, we can save some costs here by rationalizing and consolidating.” Some large companies have done it in the past, but not with good results. Part of selling premium artisan type of products means that we have to maintain our entrepreneurial nature. Yes, there is some cost associated with that, but there's also opportunities to charge more for selling these types of products.

### [[TransDigm]] Executive Chairman Nick Howley, 2018 Investor Day:
> We have a lot of units. We purposely give up on some consolidation opportunities where you may save some costs. Our belief is, frequently, those savings are an illusion and what you gain in apparent cost you lose in ownership and entrepreneurial feel. And we make those trade-offs regularly.

Conventional management wisdom adores economies of scale and abhors the idea of an unexploited synergy. Both these executives point out the short-termism latent in this thinking. Sure, a cost rationalization might realize a quick boost to margins, but is it worth sacrificing the organization’s sense of ownership, accountability, and personal initiative? Of course, to even weigh that tradeoff, you need to be aware that the tradeoff exists. Perhaps the widespread neglect by corporate managers of the intangible advantages of “entrepreneurial feel” can be traced back to yet another piece of conventional wisdom – “you can’t manage what you can’t measure.” Entrepreneurialism lacks the immediate gratification and quantifiability of cost rationalization because it bears fruit in unpredictable forms over long periods of time. It could be the extra hours employees put in because they care deeply about the quality of their work. It might be the loyalty of the customers who know they wouldn’t get the same attention at a large, centralized company. Or perhaps it is an unexpected hit product developed as a result of constant dialogue with a customer of one of the business units.

Premium Brands and [[TransDigm]] not only recognize this tradeoff but come out decisively in favor of entrepreneurialism. Both have designed their entire organizations around that conviction by decentralizing them. They emphasize to shareholders that decentralization is a critical advantage for long-term value creation. Additionally, they both say that decentralization notably distinguishes them from their peers:

### Premium Brands 2015 Letter to Shareholders
> The key to the success of this model, and what makes it more powerful than any single person or management group, is the autonomy we give these teams to run and innovate their businesses. The other side of the equation, or the balance to this entrepreneurial autonomy, is a culture of accountability that is core to Premium Brands and central to the structure of our management compensation arrangements. This balance between entrepreneurial spirit and accountability is what is translating into the somewhat unique situation, at least in our industry, of sustainable strong top and bottom line growth.

### [[TransDigm]] 2019 Proxy Statement

> The Company’s core organizational philosophy revolves around an enterprise-wide value generation strategy largely developed at the corporate level, with a significant degree of autonomy retained by the management of 34 separate operating units to determine how to best execute that strategy. By keeping these operating units small and focused with limited corporate interference in day-to-day operations, this highly decentralized approach is fundamental to achieving value for the Company’s stockholders... The Board of Directors believes the degree of decentralization of its operations is unique among its peers, and is a key to the Company’s success.

The packaged food industry in which Premium Brands competes provides a timely example to contrast the benefits of decentralization with more common practice. Followers of general business news will know that large packaged food companies (i.e. “Big Food”) have been sailing rough waters the past several years, losing market share and struggling to grow in the face of multiple headwinds – changing tastes, craft brands, e-commerce, and shifting marketing channels. In Premium Brands’ 2018 letter to shareholders, CEO George Paleologou gives his answer to the question on everybody’s mind: Why can’t Big Food adapt?

> The answer quite simply is something I refer to as short-termism...Too often the culture and infrastructure in Big Food forces managers to take short cuts in order to bolster quarterly results... A great example of Big Food and the outcome of short-termism comes from a comment passed on to me by an individual who had previously led the cheese division of a large multi-national food company. When I asked him why he had left the company, his response was that he got tired of having to find new ways of taking the cheese out of the company’s “cheese” products. Why does a successful company with a trusted, iconic brand “take the cheese out of the cheese”? What compels it to do so and why does it take such a risk given the dire consequences of alienating its long term and loyal consumers? The answer is very simple: short-termism.

It is worth emphasizing that Paleologou attributes the kind of absurd short-termism that leads to removing cheese from cheese products directly to “culture and infrastructure.” Just about any company will say it encourages accountability and entrepreneurialism, but this amounts to little more than lip service if the organization’s structure is in conflict with these goals. The problem is that a model that prioritizes these virtues requires highly educated, highly compensated, and highly ambitious executives to do something that won’t come naturally – relinquish control, perhaps at the cost of their very job. It can therefore be said that one way in which decentralized businesses distinguish themselves from the more conventional is not just what they lack but whom. [[TransDigm]] executive Jorge Valladares explains during the company’s 2018 Investor Day how following through on this conviction to entrepreneurialism results in a very different hierarchy than seen in conventional management practice:

>Noticeably and intentionally, you don't see any corporate VPs of Sales, VPs of Operations or VPs of Engineering. Typically, when those are in the organization, they have to justify their existence and really try and do a one-size-fits-all approach, which would seriously encroach on the operating unit autonomy which is critical to [[TransDigm]].

Once again, this stance flies in the face of convention. In fact, some might even accuse such a structure for insufficient governance and controls. But is it really better risk management to turn local functions into global ones by separating them from the front lines of the businesses? Are those individuals at the top structurally more likely to be incentivized to think for the long-term or the short-term? Now with that said, your takeaway from this statement shouldn’t be that the presence of a VP of Sales is damning evidence that a company does not take decentralization seriously. Nominally identical titles can mean very different things at different companies. Different businesses will have different personnel needs. The lesson here is that fostering entrepreneurialism means nothing if a company’s organizational structure is not oriented to promote it. In fact, the wrong organizational structure will do just the opposite. The more people at the corporate office whose title begins with “Chief of”, the more skepticism is warranted because it leads to the kind of short-termism that finds an executive taking the cheese out of cheese to “justify their existence”.

There is a fair amount of variation in the particulars of how decentralized businesses organize themselves. Still, some generalizations can be made. A decentralized model divides the company into units that each have their own economic identity (i.e. profit centers), with most units deriving sales of their particular products to external customers. Similarly, each unit has significant freedom to determine its own cost structures. Those cost structures might appear redundant from a birds-eye view and, as we’ve seen, tempt more short-sighted managers to intervene, but that is also what enables each unit to operate with autonomy.

Decentralization has an evil and unfortunately more common doppelgänger:
**Balkanization** . A Balkanized company is one that has fragmented into departmental silos that are often not standalone economic entities. These silos are oriented around functions, like Sales and Marketing, instead of products or businesses, in the name of cost efficiency (recall [[TransDigm]]’s decisions not to have global VPs of these functions). These silos naturally form as a result of centralization and consolidation under the thesis that costs are saved if the business units share resources. This is a good idea in some cases, but it is very easy for it to go too far if there is not a counterbalancing force to protect entrepreneurialism (like decentralization). Once begun these efforts have a momentum that is difficult to arrest, resulting in further silos and proliferating managers to coordinate them. Instead of battling with competitors for customers, silos increasingly battle amongst themselves for budgets, veto power, and anything else that will help ensure their self-preservation. This cacophony erodes any sense of control. Constructive long-term initiatives are pessimistically seen as unrealistic, so the various managers resort to what little recourse remains for them to “justify their existence” – short-sighted cost cuts – which brings us back full circle to the first comments we read from Premium Brands and [[TransDigm]]. 

To recap, decentralization fosters long-term thinking because it recognizes the long-term power of entrepreneurialism. However, because these long-term benefits of entrepreneurialism elude direct quantification, sadly many will neglect it for more short-sighted motivations. Decentralization would be more common if it did not require difficult behavior like resisting the urge to over-engineer every cost synergy, or abstaining from creating corporate positions that others might decry as reckless to do without. Premium Brands and [[TransDigm]] are two very different companies yet espouse uncannily similar decentralization philosophies. Both put the spotlight on their decentralized structure as the core of their success, and caution against the management conventions of their peers. As far as Demesne is concerned, there are several lessons covered in this letter that I keep top of mind as I search for and evaluate decentralized businesses.

• Does management acknowledge the weight of the tradeoff between centralization and decentralization? Even decentralized businesses will centralize certain functions or roles. The most important thing is that management is simply aware of the tradeoffs to begin with. Ignorance of a risk is one of the best ways to fall victim to it.

• Beware of significant and recurring restructurings. This is often symptomatic of a centralization of resources, undermining the entrepreneurialism of decentralization. However, smaller restructurings that are initiated by business units are normal and less concerning.

• It’s okay to have cost redundancies. A corollary of the previous point.

• Anybody can talk the talk of entrepreneurialism, but decentralization is walking the walk. Does management ask for accountability without delegating meaningful responsibility? What structural measures has the company taken to foster an entrepreneurial culture? For example, see the next point.

• Pay attention to the org chart. This is a difficult thing for an outsider to assess but bloated corporate management teams tend to be a major giveaway. Small corporate offices, on the other hand, are a good sign. Make note of whether senior executives are aligned along businesses, functions, geography, brands, customers, or something else and ask why.

Readers will recall from my first letter that I evaluate decentralization as a collection of tendencies that exist on a spectrum. Lessons like the ones above are rules of thumb for these tendencies, not inviolable laws. A business might score well on some tendencies but display a more mixed record on others. Cost rationalisations and centralized executive roles can make sense even in a business doing its most to foster entrepreneurialism. For all these reasons, evaluating decentralization in my role as a portfolio manager is a prudential judgment that I make by weighing the totality of all the evidence (i.e. the process for any good decision). You can expect that in future letters, I’ll continue to expound on further important elements of decentralization that I take into consideration, as well as revisiting the themes introduced here.