# Top Acquirer Spotlight Podcast - [[Constellation Software]]

## Interview with Mark Miller, COO of [[Constellation Software]]


I've been fortunate enough to be around since the inception of Constellation. I was actually part of the first acquisition Constellation did, a company called Trapeze, back in 1995, we did very specific niche software for the transit industry, helping schedules, platforms, and help figure out how you should train drivers running the bus systems. So i came out from kind of both sides, startup CEO and Constellation, which was really an interesting transition for me because, if you're running a software company, you tend to be all about "Let's take care of customers, build new products and build our business over time", but one thing you tend not to do a lot is acquisitions. 

When Constellation came along and acquired us, I had a chance to learn a little bit about doing acquisitions, which was a real education for me. It is an important part to think about how you grow your business as well. Sometimes you want to build products, and some other times it might make sense to acquire and move to different areas of business. 


So as a little bit of background on myself, I sit on Constellation's board, I am the COO of Constellation, but I really spend all my time doing, building up Volaris. We are very decentralized, very focused on getting our businesses being the ones that thrive.

What's different about us would be that we really care about decentralization. Think scale, when you start to put businesses together and stepping them and they keep getting bigger and bigger businesses, you'll lose a lot of accountability. And not that we don't do that, sometimes we will buy businesses and we'll functionally integrate them, for sure we'll do that as well. But we really do like to leave a group of business leaders in charge of particular areas of business, generally a vertical market. And a vertical market is a very broad, broad segment. So for instance it can be a sub-vertical, it can be transportation as a vertical, or it can be transit, more specific. And so we really like this leadership team that is in charge of that particular area of the business to really be able to control and focus on that. And we even do that by geography. So we might even have a different leadership team working on the same sub-vertical but in a different geography. But again we think **Accountability always trumps scale.** 

And it has worked pretty well for us, we continue to execute this strategy and we really believe in developing people, I quite spend the bulk on my time, as well as acquiring businesses, making sure that we develop our people. Three quarters of our leaders are people hired from internals, right. Which I think is a pretty good statement about how we do things. So we want to be a place where people can continue to build up their careers, learn a lot, and I think that attracts a certain group of people. 

This vertical thing is very important to us. A lot of technology businesses today, especially big, big brands, you know the Salesforce of the world, they really try to be the Swiss Army knife, they try to solve everybody's problem but nobody's really really well. Our thinking is we really want to think about our market, think about how we can really solve their issue while really listening to our customers, and build a group of people who really want to work and build with these customers over time. 

So being a small business, and never getting really really big is OK in our world, we're good with that, because we'd rather focus on our customers and our target market.

A lot of leaders of businesses, CEOs of businesses, owners of businesses, they spent a lot of time building their business up. They really care about their customers, they care about their staff, they care about what things they're doing, and they really want to find a place for that business that makes sense for it in the long run. And we like to be kind of that home for that business, because we buy businesses and we never sell them, we use a very different strategy. Because when you're talking to an owner-operator of a business you are able to talk about where they see that business going for the long run, and you want them to be part of that as well, to continue to grow up their business. 

One of my favorite interview question is when I am interviewing someone that I might be hiring, it might be for an analyst, I ask them, "What would you do differently if you'd own the business forever, versus for the next five years." And it changes a lot of your thinking because, if you're going to be flipping a business or selling it to strategic or financial buyers, you will think a lot about maximizing the multiples that you're gonna be able to get on the EBIT as you're getting closer to that exit time frame.

We sit on a sound board of companies and they think a lot about what they're gonna do when the exit happens. And when you think beyond that, you're able to make investments in people, and additional products and solutions for your customers that you'd be not able to do if you're thinking "it's time to get out, and we gotta make sure we flip this thing and we make a lot of money doing it."

One thing we do with our businesses is that we are basically able to benchmark all our businesses against each other. And benchmark is not perfect because depending on what you're trying to do, one is better than another, but they give you a kind of sense to where to look and see if there's something that you might be able to do better, by looking at another business who is actually performing better on that benchmark. It might be as simple as how you are running your marketing group, or how you're running you professional services group, or how efficiently you're doing R&D, and our ability to benchmark our businesses again each other is a great opportunity because we're able to say, "Hey look, this particular business is able to do this thing particularly well, why don't you go ask them what they're doing and try to learn from them?"  And we try to bring them together for events where they focus on certain areas of their business or educate each other on how to do things. An example would be Mergers and Acquisitions. How do you do Mergers and Acquisitions? What's involved, what does integration looks like? 

So we are perpetually in education mode, trying to teach our leaders how to do things, to learn from each other, and to develop their team as well to be able to do that. And I think we've done an OK job at that. And I think what's really helpful for what is a business over time, is when I started we were really really small with dozens of employees, and now the business has continued to grow, and it's built on a structure of learning, decentralization, people development, so it allows us to continue to grow it, and continue to do what we've been doing for a long time, so that's the strategy.