# Topicus: M&A Strategy & Growth Runway
by #InPractise 

_Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise._

### Do you just want to open up and share a bit more about your background and, specifically, what you did at Topicus?

Back when I joined in 2014, it was Total Specific Solutions, TSS. It was acquired by CSI; I think it was acquired at some time in the summer of 2015. From 2014 to 2020 I was at TSS.

When I started, I was reporting directly to Han Knooren who is one of the group CEOs and, in multiple projects, I also had direct contact with Daan Dijkhuize who was the big CEO of TSS. Back then, I think the main office only had 15 people and now it is around a few hundred. In my last year, I was coached by Ramon who is another of TSS’s group CEOs, now Topicus. I also did presentations abroad, for all the operating groups within CSI. That was with Mark Leonard at one time. He was cool. I met him a few times, actually. Once in Canada but also a few times in the Netherlands. He’s brilliant. He knows his numbers. I also like his philosophy about putting the responsibility as low as possible in organizations; he took that to the next level.

### Did you enjoy working there? Did you learn a lot? Why did you leave?

I enjoyed it and I learned a lot; it was truly a learning curve. I also think I’m a totally different person than I was before I joined TSS. I was very lucky joining at that moment in time, because it was very small. You could go into Robin’s office, asking questions and you were in it together. Back then, TSS only had eight or nine companies and now they have around 90, so it’s a lot bigger. It was also very decentralized, but centralized in location. Every company was only two hours’ drive away, except for one, which was in Romania. There was a lot of knowledge sharing and people were truly into the spirit of CSI, embracing the best practices.

It was also an extreme personal journey for me, because I invested a lot in personal coaching. Probably for the five years that I worked there, it was filled with personal coaching, so it also changed me and enabled me to grow, as a person.

Why did I leave? The only reason I left was due to the fact that I was still one of the youngest people to be an MD in TSS; I was 35 back then. A lot of people – especially when they sell their companies – are older, especially in the markets that TSS is operating in and so it felt very lonely at the top. As an MD, you are not part of your company but you are also not part of TSS, so you are always in between and I really like working within a team itself. One of my ambitions is to do a scale up company. I had an opportunity to invest in a scale up company, where I am today. There is a team, and so now we are running a company with three of us, instead of myself with the support of TSS on finance, HR and so on. But it was never your team, your co-workers. It was always, these are my MDs or my managers or the people that did my finance, the person standing next to me, brainstorming about some decisions, and that’s why I left. If was 20 years older, I would probably have stayed.

### Could you describe some of the businesses? Could you give us an example? We know what BMS is, but could you give us a specific example of a typical business and what it did and how it works?

I think one of the most typical businesses in TSS nowadays, but what they are focusing on, is vertical market software, which is a very localized niche market – especially in Europe – within the boundaries of a country because there is a lot of legislation in the software itself. It’s really difficult to have a company in the Netherlands and do exactly the same in Germany, because there is different legislation, so you actually have to rewrite the whole code. That makes it very small, local and it has low competition because the market size is very small.

If you looked at the portfolio, the main industries are a lot of public, social and government companies. They also have other companies, of course, but they are always very specific industries, with a specific demand. For example, one of the companies makes healthcare software, within the Netherlands. That is only for the Netherlands, for 17 million people.

### Let’s say, for those 2,000 customers, are you saying there would be one software that all of them would use, or are there two or three?

In 2015, there were four and now I think two or three are left.

### Would Topicus own all three of them or two of them? How would that work?

In this case, they have the leading one; the one that has the biggest market share. But for an example with regards to notaries, I’m not sure about the number, but let’s say the market share in revenue is around four million, for the Netherlands. There may be 500 to 600 customers in the Netherlands and I think there are four or five companies and TSS owns three of them. That is one of the big differences between TSS and CSI, because TSS operates in Europe. To make a comparison, Chicago has 20 million people living in one city; the Netherlands, as a country, has 17 million; Belgium has 12 million. Every country has its own regulations, with a different law and a different language and a different culture. It’s easier if you have a software company in Chicago and you move to New York. But that option doesn’t exist in Europe. Where CSI is more focusing on the worldwide vertical, until 2017, TSS was only focusing on the Netherlands. There were only 17 million people so it was very specific.

What TSS did was to look into the market in the Netherlands, they had the opportunity to buy multiple companies, in the same industry, own that industry – within the regulations, of course – and control market more than CSI could if they have the same companies in different countries, because then they are not adding value to each other. They can just share best practices and how to run the business, but they cannot share, for example, the added value that they can provide to the market and to their customers. That is one major difference between TSS and CSI.

### I just want to go a little more into the products that Topicus has. I’m wondering how complicated they are? Does it involve the long integration service, before new customers come on? How difficult are they to swap out? Is it the case that once they’re in, they’re in?

The answer to your question before the comma is, it depends. After the comma, it depends on the market, especially in public and social industries. In those type of industries, if they are your customer, they are your customer and they stay there for 15, 20, 30 years. If they leave you, you can forget about them for the next 20 or 30 years. In general, in the focused market, if it is either in the Netherlands or in France, if they are your customer and they are unsatisfied, they will still give you the opportunity to resolve it, for several years. Then, at a certain point, they will leave.

The TSS software is always into the core of the company itself. If you to change, first of all, you have the assess the cost of your contract. When can I stop my contract? Some contracts are three, five, seven or even 10 years. Then you have your conversion cost of training your new people making sure that the data goes away. It can take up to a few months, maybe nearly a year, depending on which specific industry you are in, before you can actually transfer to a different system. Then you have all the elements of the new system, so it could take you two or maybe three years, before you are satisfied with your new system.

Then there is the question as to whether it is worth changing or is it better to stick with what you have? That’s more about the companies that are available elsewhere and the size of contract. There are companies that have a recurring revenue per customer of maybe 50,000 or 100,000 or more, but then you also have the customers that only do 1,000 per year. Their transactions, of course, cycle much faster. But because it’s public, because it’s social, because it’s healthcare, they are less competitive because the advantage that they will get from going to a different system is not about adding more revenue to the company; it’s just about resolving the complaints that they have and hoping that the complaints will not be there with the new system. But, most likely, they will have different complaints.

The question is, what is the added value for the customer and it’s not about getting more money for your investment. It’s about making sure that your processes are aligned and that you can make sure that health is being given to your customers.

### How much input did customers have on the software itself? Was it very customized or is it more general?

More general. TSS does have some customized software. Now there are 90 companies so, of course, it is much bigger than it was when I was there. Most of them were general and, if there was customized work in it before CSI took over, one of the rules was, never make customized software; always make sure it’s general because you cannot service it into the future. All the companies started to make it general so that helped. One of the other questions is, can you make sure you are being paid for the value that you provide to the customer? In every software company you have new releases. But one of the things that Robin once told me was, the software that we deliver, it’s not packets of milk. On the packets of milk, every year there is indexation. That is actually making sure that any changes are being reflected in the price of the milk. One liter of milk is one liter of milk, today and tomorrow.

But what we do, if you bought the software four years ago, we add new features, so the software today has a different value than it had four year ago, so how can you make sure that you capture that value? That is actually what TSS is starting to do. When they created a new module, they would add it as a new module that customers could buy, because that is the easiest way to make money and make sure you gain an additional euro, because they want to have that specific module. But make sure that the specific software that you make is general – the core system – so it is not customized. Even though they do not switch it on and off, it is still in your regular process of software.

That’s actually what we did. We started to sell modules and it was just a toggle on or off which we knew would be the added value for the customer.

### You talking about modules makes me also think about price increases. How much of a role did that play in this? Is a certain price increase built in all the time?

In 2016 we hit the newspapers with some price increases that we did; people thought that they were enormous. We did it but we always tried to make sure we had a happy customer. We explained the value. For example, I had one customer that joined the company in 1990 and they only had indexation, year over year. They were in a totally different money range than if they had joined today. At one time, you have to switch over and have a price increase that hurts and you need to have a conversation about it. But after that, the customers are generally happy because they also saw that we were adding more value to it, just by explaining it.

Value-based pricing is a hot topic, but always selected on the basis of what is possible for the customer, with the customer and how hard or softly can you do it in the market that you are in? At the beginning, we did it very hard; very black and white and we learnt a lot. Now, it’s more flexible. They still do it but it’s always looking at other constraints and double checking what we did in the past and not making the same mistakes that somebody else already has done. We try to follow the best practices of TSS; share what you did, explain it and help each other to make sure that you don’t step into the same problems that somebody else already did.

### Maybe we could shift over to M&A. How would you describe the market for M&A? Just hearing you talk, it definitely seems as if it’s fragmented. How else would you characterize it? Is it very competitive on all the deals?

There are several factors to look at here. First of all, it’s Europe, so if you buy a company in the Netherlands, you can buy the same in Germany and the same in France, Switzerland and so on, because it’s fragmented. It’s also culture. CSI wanted to buy a company in France, for the last 20 years, and I don’t think they achieved that because it was a Canadian guy calling into France. In France you need to understand that it is more personal. You have to eat with people, have dinner, show them your personal house, have a family dinner. It is a totally different way of doing M&A.

What TSS actually did was that they started to buy companies outside the Netherlands in around 2016 and the first company that they bought in France took them two years before they eventually crossed the border. I think the first one was in 2017 and now they have 10, so they accelerated after the first one. I think the last four were in 2020. Because they had one foot on the ground, they could expand from there. TSS is setting up M&A teams in the country; they’ve got an M&A team in Spain, they’ve got an M&A team in France, they’ve got an M&A team in the Nordics.

Previously, it had been more based in Canada so TSS actually pushed the M&A responsibilities down into the operations, giving opportunities to the MDs. If you have a healthy business, with good operations, you can either invest the money in your company and you need to hit a specific IRR hurdle, or you can give it to TSS and we will invest it for you. Or, at a certain point, you can start investing it yourself. You can try to find companies that fit your market, buy them, pass the IRR hurdle and grow your own empire.

For example, Dorinda. She now runs 10 or 12 companies, within TSS. She started as the managing director back in 2015. The problem is, money is cheap. Everyone has money. If you look at TSS’s target companies, they are now rolling out into more niche businesses, but if you look at the small and medium sized companies, you can buy them for €1, €2, €3, €4, €5 million and that means that everyone that has money is a potential competitor and also an investor.

I think the main thing that is a USP in TSS’s M&A, compared to angels or venture capitalists, is that TSS is in it for the long run; they never sell a company. While venture capitalists just want to make money. There is a mind shift of people’s philosophy to have a healthier world, to have a legacy, to take better care of their employees, that you have taken care of for the last 20 or 40 years, then they go into retirement. That’s more my philosophy. More and more you see that people are not in it for the big money anymore. Before 2009, it was all about euros or dollars. Now it is about having a healthy and positive footprint in the world. That means that business owners are more willing to have a smaller bank account, to make sure that the company, the legacy, stays alive. In that sense, TSS is the perfect one to go to. Most likely, a venture capitalist will split it, at one point, break it down, lower the cost and sell it in two or three years, because they have a short-term vision.

I think that unique selling point will be an advantage, more and more, for TSS, compared to fast money.

### What does a typical seller look like for a TSS deal? Are we talking about people who have founded it, families, or are they corporate owners?

It’s definitely people who are going into retirement and they do not have someone to take over within the family itself. Death is also one, if the company owner dies and the family takes over and they do not have the business experience. That is more about within the family itself. That is more the small medium corporates. Then we have the companies that actually started to do the IT themselves. An example here is a company that was bought somewhere in the Nordics, and the owners were multiple banks. It was started earlier and they always kept it and now they were going more into their core business, so they were selling specific departments, such as the IT department. TSS comes in and buys it. So there are also those older and bigger companies, the banking corporations, for example.

Then we have the software companies that have multiple software companies and they are refocusing their strategy. You also see that happening with Philips. They are more focused and getting rid of a lot of divisions, in the Netherlands. That is also happening with IT companies that have multiple verticals and they just want to go back to one specific vertical and they sell the different software companies. That’s the second one.

Then, of course, we have the investment companies that actually bought a company a few years ago and they now want to sell it. Those are the three main focus areas; investor companies, corporations and the family businesses.

### Is this the situation where you know who everybody is and you have this big database of all the potential companies you would like to acquire and it just works that way?

It literally does, yes. They have a massive database of a lot of companies and they profile the owners or the shareholders to determine what is going on. What is the philosophy; what is behind it? It could be you or me but it could also be a corporation, of course. They dig into the strategy and determine what is happening. It is actually a funnel of sales so they start nurturing the person, by calling them and sharing with them the philosophy of TSS, sharing best practices, inviting them to talk with other people within TSS. There are a few people in TSS who have sold their business to them so they know what is happening within TSS itself. They are actually the first people they would be put in contact with because they will understand TSS’s philosophy and what happens after the company is acquired. That applies especially to family businesses.

For corporations, it is more about the philosophy. If it is also a corporation that will be a future customer, then it’s all about how you make sure that I still have the services that I require as of today and into the future? My bank that I have still depends on your software, so how do you act with me, as a customer? I may first of all bring them into contact with lookalike customers, from different companies. It’s quite a process and it can take up to a few years. The most challenging part is when TSS looks at how many other companies are acquired in Europe and which of those companies were we unfamiliar so why were they not on our target list? What happened? What did we do wrong and why didn’t we know them? That’s quite a list.

### Once you acquire them, how important is improvement? What kind of improvements do you make? Is it one of these things where you can see profit margin on day one, when you acquire it, and then three years later it’s double? What sort of things happen?

Before TSS acquires the company, there is a specific IRR hurdle that needs to fit the financial numbers and it has a specific integration plan behind it, to make that number. There is a yearly evaluation to determine how it is going, at the highest level, but then also on a monthly and quarterly basis in the levels in between. The process is, how are we going to implement the best practices and what do we think will the end benefit out of it. I’m not sure if you know of the book _How to Double your Profit in Six Months_; it’s a small book; 90 pages. I think it came out in 2007. Every page has one item that you need to do, as a business owner, in order to double your profits. It is very straightforward and pretty easy to read. I think that all the best practices that TSS are doing is that they have mastered a way as to how they can multiply that small book for multiple companies.

Of course, in the beginning, you do the obvious. You cut costs, cut a lot of overheads, cut out bad projects, go back to the core business. That is the first year. You also do a little price increase, those kind of things. You look through all the expenses and get rid of all external people. TSS takes over and supports you with finance and HR; that all goes to TSS so that is a big gain. You, as a business owner, only have to focus on the business because everything else – HR and financials – has been taken care of. You don’t have to talk with banks anymore because there is almost an unlimited amount of money and you can focus on your business, on your customers and get close to them and forget everything else.

What I saw was, there is always a pretty quick turnaround in the first year, that can be very positive or very negative. There is always a massive change in the first year. But then it’s about, how do we make sure this is a continuous process and how can we make sure that it happens year over year over year? If you then fall back to the indexation, that will destroy your part of the milk, and then it’s just milk and you want to gain added value.

How can you make sure you have happy customers, provide good customer service, make sure your R&D is up to speed and bring new features into the market which you can charge additional fees for? You are going to look into your pricing system. Where is the added value within your software that you are not currently charging for? Maybe you should add variable charges on it. You have the basic license fee per month but for that specific functionality, you will charge them per click or per view. Then you are actually gaining, adding value for the customer but also gaining more money for yourself.

Then, of course, how do you make sure you get 10% organic growth, instead of 2%? What do you have to do to achieve that? There is a bunch of things that you have to do there and it also becomes more and more difficult. Most of the time, you can do them once, but how do you develop your organization to ensure that you do it year over year? It comes back to – and this is a really difficult one – how can you make sure that you are building software that the customer is going to pay for? There is a lot of writing about it but, at the end of the day, I think it’s getting better and better, in general, with multiple companies. But you first need to go through the first three years because you really have to have the TSS phase before you can do this. At one point, you are going to ask your customers, if I’m going to build this, then I want you to invest a specific amount of money and this will be the license value when I deliver it to you. Do you want to sign up or not, because I know that 1,000 customers are asking for it? If they are not willing to actually sign a contract before you start building the software, then do not build the software. Yes, they want to have it, but they are not willing to pay for it. If you can master that process, then you will get the 8%, 9%, 10% revenue growth, year over year.

### You mentioned the organic growth rate. That’s one of the questions too; it’s so much higher than CSI’s. What do you think the secret sauce is behind that? How do they do it?

That is actually the part I just explained; that’s one part of it. There are multiple elements there. I think the main item is that it comes back to best practices, sharing and learning from each other. Up until 2017, all the companies – and I think that’s still more than half of TSS’s revenue – were located within 300 square kilometers, so it was two hours’ drive. I could drive 20 minutes and I was in a different company of TSS that were doing best practices and they would drive to me, for 20 minutes and we worked together on best practices. If it is CSI, they have a company in Australia, in New Zealand, in Japan, in North America, in Asia, within the same sector, but it’s really difficult to get those people together and actually share ideas and philosophies, sit in the same room and think about those kind of things. I think that the geographic spread had a massive impact on the improvements. Now it’s still Europe, so everything is still within a two-hour flight.

### I thought there was something that TSS had that was called an Investor Day, where you incubate your own ideas? Did that play into this as well?

I do not know about the Investor Day. What I do know is that we had a lot of knowledge sharing. Three times a year, everyone flies into TSS, but that was more for the general things. Then we shared the best practices so that was the place where I shared my best practices. We went into workshops after that. That was actually the starting point. The main thing happens after that workshop. If there were people interested in my best practice, they would call me and I would go to them the day, week or month after, and work together with them to implement the best practice.

CSI also has that. I once flew to London but what happened there was that I was in a group of people who had already been away from their company for three weeks, because they first had a week in Portugal, a week’s holiday, and then they went to London. After that week, they all flew back to their own companies, in South America, Australia and North America. The follow up was much more difficult. Explaining something is one thing, and someone is able to nod, yes, I understand what you are saying. But the most important thing is, now I have that information, but how am I going to do it within my company, with all the challenges that I see? Who can help me? Who can I call, for 15 minutes, on a day-to-day basis, while I am undertaking this project called very best pricing or called reducing customer service time from 10 minutes to two minutes, having a mentor next to me? In Europe, that is what was very obvious to do because you could get into the car, drive for an hour and have a cup of coffee or meet halfway. If it’s just 30 minutes of your time, you can do it every Monday. That is truly what I believe the massive difference is.

The second thing is, TSS is still pretty small compared to CSI. It’s very easy to go and find the person that you need for your support question. TSS truly believes that knowledge is shared by people and not by intranets or documentation. Robin taught everyone, if you are doing a good job inside your own company, please go out to other companies and explain what you are doing. Also, learn from them about what they are doing. Put your heart out; share the things that you did that weren’t so good. If you had a problem, then other R&D managers, or sales managers or MDs, or customer support managers, may have had the same problems. You, as a customer support manager, please go to the other 40 customer support managers because they will have the same problem. You are not unique. That really helps, to have a peer next to you. If you run a company – which I now am – if I want to have some R&D support, I have to find someone in my own network. TSS already had a network of 40 R&D managers that could help me.

### How is the relationship between TSS and CSI? It sounds as if it was pretty good. Were there differences? Were there tensions?

It was pretty good. There was a lot of back and forth between the operating groups, sharing best practices. The door was always open. It was also due to Robin. Robin is really eager to learn. As an organization we were always very eager to learn and to adjust. He just pushed everyone. Call this person; call that person. Even if you had a question, as a sales rep or a customer support employee, he would ask for help. He would come to you and say, I’ve got this number of this lady. She is a global CSI director, with a lot of titles. Just call her. Getting a customer support worker to call a director somewhere in Canada meant that there were no borders, and that opened a lot of doors. I know that, for example, CSI was keen on TSS’s HR program and that is also maybe something to understand. In Europe, you are not allowed to fire people. At the end of the day, you are not allowed to do that. That means, if someone is doing a bad job you can’t kick them out and get someone else in within two weeks, as I think you can in the US. That means that you have to invest in people. You have to develop their talent and train them and make them stronger. That is something that was pretty unique and new for CSI. They understood that you had to develop people, but maybe not in this extreme way, with these obligations, as it is in Europe. That was a big difference between TSS and the Canadian companies, that the Canadian companies learned from.

### I wanted to ask a little bit about the CEO, Mr Dijkhuizen. How would you describe his style and skills? Is it similar to CSI where he is the guru at the top? Or is it more of a team?

I’ve never worked for him so I only know about the stories in the newspapers. I didn’t know the company before it was acquired. What I read is that it is more about a team. They had massive organic growth, much higher than TSS or CSI. What he was actually doing was telling people, okay, if you have a great idea, you will have a certain amount of money; build your plan and make it work. He was actually investing the money, as an entrepreneur or as an investor, in his own people. But also, what I understood was that he gives them a share of that specific project. If you are successful, you are also the company owner and you will get a share – a few percent – of everything that comes out of the project. He was building intrapreneurs in his own company which gave him massive organic growth because you get a very high commitment, from everyone.

When I read that article, I thought it was brilliant. That is the added value that he can bring to TSS, with that philosophy.

### What was the biggest challenge in driving that continuous improvement at operating companies? As you said, if you’ve got eight or nine, you can focus. When you’ve got 90, 100, 150, how do you maintain 10% organic growth?

The biggest challenge that TSS has and acknowledges is talent development, especially having the right people, with the TSS mindset, in the key positions. TSS now has quite a lot of international companies, so how do you make sure that those people, all the way to the Nordics – which is a long way away in Europe – drive the TSS philosophy? How do you make sure that they also share the best practices? Are they truly TSS-minded? If you acquire a company, will the business owner be able to adopt the TSS mindset? If not, you have to replace him, but where do you find the replacement?

It is either someone internally, growing up in the company, or you have to acquire them from outside TSS. If you acquire someone from outside TSS, how do you make sure that they do not think in cost centers, but only think in profit centers? Those kind of questions were the main topic and that’s why TSS is investing so much in talent development, to make sure that people grow to the correct positions. That will be, and is, the biggest challenge within TSS.

### When you were there, was turnover pretty steady? Did people tend to stay in your kind of positions or was trying to replace people a continuous problem?

People definitely stay in their positions, at the MD level and higher; not when it was just acquired, because then you have a new person inside TSS. They stayed for longer periods. I now know of one person that left and he had been there for six or seven years. At least as far as I know, everyone is still there. That only leaves the most difficult positions, especially the positions above that, that have multiple companies. But then, of course, in most cases, there is a positive financial element and you can build your own empire. That is now happening in the Nordics and also in France, where you see people are building their own TSS, which is positive, because that is also one of the most difficult things to find; a person that you can trust, as TSS, to say, you can have multiple companies, in the Nordics and go and do your stuff. We trust you regarding the culture, because it will probably be a little bit different from in the Netherlands.

That is all difficult and that is why they have a lot of talent programs, on every level, within every company, up to how, eventually, you become the CEO of TSS. It goes all the way up there. It’s pretty cool and intense. There are a lot of talent development and management development programs, in order to make sure that people are on board.

The challenge is, going from five to 10 companies, you can manage that. In terms of 10 to 40, you can manage that with a small group. But now growing at the multiples that TSS is growing from 80 to 800, then you need a lot more people than when you move from eight to 80. That is where the challenge is. You acquire a lot of new companies, with a lot of new managers, and you have to transfer their skillset to TSS.

I don’t think they yet have the solution but I know they are investing in it, to make sure that they can find one.

### How do you look at the risks to organic growth, for TSS? Let’s say, in five years’ time, TSS has 130, 140 companies. How do you look at the potential risks to organic growth going from high single digits, even double digits, down to low single digit growth?

If you look at the Netherlands, that is where there are TSS’s grown up companies, because they have been around the longest, with a few exceptions. They are still increasing and increasing, on a yearly basis. All the new acquired companies are in new countries. If you look at France, they now have 10 companies. That is the same amount as TSS had in 2015, when they started. If I take the experience of the last five or six years, in Netherlands and you bring that to France, if you multiply that over multiple countries, I think there is a lot to gain.

That’s why I believe the organic growth can be even more successful because the best practices are closer, because you only have to fly to the Netherlands, instead of Canada. That can still be fairly impressive.

### What do you think is the biggest risk for Topicus or TSS, broadly?

First of all, talent development and, secondly, how do you make sure that you stick to your values, especially when acquiring a company and especially when money is cheap? Don’t get greedy. Sometimes people may say, for this company, let’s pay 10% more, even though IRR says we shouldn’t do it. Don’t be an opportunist; always be a realist, which they are today.
