
# Unblemished by Industry Dogma
Industries are full of unwritten truths and established ways of thinking. Industry veterans often get accustomed to a certain way of doing or thinking about things and have trouble approaching problems from a different perspective. This is the consistency and commitment bias Charlie Munger has talked about in his speech "The psychology of human misjudgment". Succumbing to the old guard prevents growth and innovation.

A simple example of consistency and commitment bias is seen in science, where it takes a new generation, with fresh eyes, who have not been committed to the old conclusions, to be open to thinking differently. Albert Einstein was not a working scientist in 1905, when he wrote four papers that revolutionized science; he was a twenty-six years old Swiss patent office clerk. Einstein sent his works to the journal *Annalen der Physik* but heard no response. The old guard could not handle Albert Einstein. But one man, Max Planck, could see that Einstein was on to something. Planck understood the negative power of the consistency and commitment bias among humans: "a scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but because its opponents eventually die and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it".

All of our intelligent fanatic CEOs were either absolute beginners, with no industry experience, or had minimal experience. Their inexperience allowed them to be open to trying something new, to challenge the old guard. The CEOs developed new ways of operating that established companies could not compete with. Out intelligent fanatics show us that having industry experience can be detrimental. Sol Price said it well: "Fortunately, most of us had backgrounds that were alien to retailing. We did not know what wouldn't work or what we couldn't do". The same was true at Southwest Airlines when the company was forced to operate with only three airplanes on a heavy schedule. Everyone in the industry thought it was impossible, given the common turn times of airplanes, but most Southwest employees did not know any different. The employees were able to turn around an airplane in ten minutes or less, compared to the industry average of forty-five minutes to an hour. John Patterson and Chester Cadieux had zero experience in the manufacturing or convenience store industries, but they eventually dominated them. 

The 3G partners have all run businesses in industries in which they had no prior experience, and succeeded. Jorge Paulo Lehman had limited knowledge about operating a brokerage firm before he started Garantia. Beto Sicupira had no knowledge about operating a retailer when he took over Lojas Americanas, Marcel Telles had zero brewing knowledge when he became CEO of Brahma. None of them knew what was impossible, but they were well versed in leveraging the potential of human capital, as they had done at Banco Garantia. Telles said: "At Garantia, the only real asset besides the name was our people." The 3G partners started with little knowledge about the industries in which their companies ran, but they soaked up all they could from the best competitors in the United States. Lehman benchmarked Goldman Sachs, Sicupira benchmarked Walmart, and Telles benchmarked Anheuser-Busch.
