# Using a powerful brand to drive Growth

[[Brands]] power can be enhanced through innovation and extensions. With creativity and advertising, strong existing brands can anchor expansion into new products and categories. Trends in fashion arise from the design innovation of style creators, but are stoked by a commercial payoff: change the color or shape of Oakley sunglasses and some people will discard their old pair and buy a new one to keep up with fashion. For a company like Luxxotica, the ongoing practice turns something old-tech like sunglasses into an annuity stream.

Similarly, brands like Hermes or Louis Vuitton have gradually expanded from limited lines of ultra-expensive handbags and travel accessories to ready-to-wear clothing and sunglasses. Such innovation is less a function of big R&D budgets than the ability to exploit the full value of existing brands. Consider the feat of making the same product more expensive with a touch of branding finesse: put Swarovski crystals on a Moët & Chandon champagne bottle, package it as a premium gift, and it sells for multiples of the product's standard version.

Brands considered strong status symbols often offer significant innovation leadership -  many luxury brands glide easily from handbags to perfume or sunglasses. However, too many products can dilute the appeal. While companies like Louis Vuitton have limited expansion to a few related categories, there are examples of overreaching. Take Pierre Cardin. Initially a high-end fashion brand, the company licensed its brand out to products as diverse as cigarettes and pens. The end result has been a material dimming of the brand cachet.