# What can Investors learn from Scaling Laws?

Scaling laws might be the right way to think about scaling in organisms, but does it tell us anything about companies, and especially firms as they grow? The question that needs to be answered is: why is it predictable that a business will grow from a mouse to an elephant? This is a little like asking the meaning of life, and we will try hard not to give an answer as intractable as Douglas Adams' suggestion in The Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy (where the answer to life, the universe and everything was 42!). Several tenets are important. A business ought to be able to self-fund its own growth, and if the opportunity set is large, then the return on capital needs to be suitably high. Second, barriers to entry should increase with size; that way a company's moat is widened as the firm grows. To do this, the basic building block of the business, its skeletal structure, is probably best kept very simple. In short, we want a skeletal structure that can support growth from mouse to elephant without too much skeletal re-engineering.

Let's consider traditional high street retailing. Goods are sent from the supplier to the retailer's central warehouse, where they are stored until demanded by the shops. Goods are then sent to the high street stores. These are expensive pieces of real estate and have high operating costs. Price aside for a moment, the quality of service the consumer perceives is largely a function of staff levels, staff helpfulness, product range, shop furnishings and so on. So, there are lots of constantly variable elements to service quality at the most expensive end of the distribution system. it seems to us that the skeletal structure is highly complex, and many things can go wrong.

Contrast this to the internet model. Goods are sent from the supplier to a central warehouse, but often only after the order has been taken. The goods are then sent direct to the customer with the expensive high street real estate missed out. The quality of service perceived by the customer is the speed of delivery, the feel of the website, functionality of the web site (such as recommendations), breadth of product range and so on and these factors are inherently more controllable. They are fixed in terms of expense and also customer experience (a web site viewed in New York looks the same as the same website viewed in London or Hong Kong). So, whilst quality is inherently patchy at most high street retailers, it is fixed at Amazon. This is important as it is complexity that is one of the main reasons firms fail as they try to grow.

It seems to us that the basic building block of internet retailing, its skeletal structure, is far more robust, scalable and cheaper than the high street equivalent. In other words, its power law is very high, and implies that businesses with the simplicity of operation as say, Amazon.com, have a shot at being far bigger, quicker and more profitable than their high street equivalents. Nomad has an investment in Amazon for more reasons than the firm's simplicity of operations. But when this basic building block is combined with the scale efficiencies shared model (which increase the moat as the firm grows), customer centric orientation of the firm's founder, as well as his healthy disdain for Wall Street, this combination makes us think that we may have a mouse that can turn into an elephant. to those who argue Amazon is large already we ask two questions: what do you think e-commerce will be as a proportion of US retailing in ten-years' time, and what do you think it was last year?