# Why Women care for Fashion
Evolutionists and art historians agree that fashion is all about status. In their dress, women follow fashion more than men. Yet women seek clues to status, which change with fashion, and men seek clues to fertility, which do not.

Men should not care less what women wear so long as they are smooth-skinned, slim, young, healthy and generally nubile. Women should care greatly about what men wear, because it tells them a great deal about their background, their wealth, their social status, even their ambitions. So why do women follow clothes fashions more avidly than men?

I can think of several answers to this question. First, the theory is simply wrong and men prefer status symbols, whereas women prefer bodies. Perhaps, but that flies in the face of an awful lot of robust evidence. 

Second, women's fashion is not about status after all. Third, modern societies have been in a two-century aberration from which they are just emerging. In Regency England, Louis XIV's France, medieval Christendom, ancient Greece, or among modern Yanomamö, men followed fashion as vividly as women. Men wore bright colors, flowing robes, jewels, rich materials, gorgeous uniforms, and gleaming, decorated armor. The damsels that knights rescued were no more fashionably accoutred than their paramours. Only in Victorian times did the deadly uniformity of the black frock coat and its dismal modern descendant, the gray suit, infect the male sex, and only in this century have women's hemlines gone up and down like yo-yos.

This suggest the fourth and most intriguing explanation, which is that women do care more about clothes and men do care less, but instead of influencing the other sex with their concerns, they influence their own. Each sex uses its own preferences to guide its own behavior. Experiments show that men think women care about physique much more than they actually do; women think men care about status cues much more than they actually do. So perhaps each sex simply acts out its instincts in the conviction that the other sex likes the same things as they do.

One experiment seems to support the idea that men and women mistake their own preferences for those of the opposite sex. April Fallon and Paul Rozin of the University of Pennsylvania showed four simple line drawings of male or female figures in swimsuits to nearly five hundred undergraduates. In each case, the figures differed only in thinness. They asked the subjects to indicate their current figure, their ideal figure, the figure that they considered most attractive to the opposite sex and the figure they thought most attractive most attractive in the opposite sex. Men's current, ideal and attractive figures were almost identical: men are, on average, content with their figures. Women, as expected, were far heavier than what they thought most attractive to men, which was heavier still than their own ideal. But intriguingly, both sexes erred in their estimation of what the other sex most likes. Men think women like a heavier build than they do. Women think men like women thinner than they do.

However, such confusions cannot be the whole explanation of why women follow fashion because it does not work for other features of attraction. Women are far more concerned with their own youth than men despite the fact that they mostly do not themselves seek younger partners.

And yet the notion that fashion is about status revolts us in a democratic age. We pretend instead that fashion is actually about off a body to best advantage. New fashions are worn by gorgeous models, and perhaps women buy them because they subconsciously credit the beauty of the dress and not the model. Surveys reveal what everybody knows: men are attracted by women in revealing, tight or skimpy clothing. Women are less attracted by such clothing on men.

Most female fashions  are more or less explicitly designed to enhance beauty. A gigantic crinoline made a waist look small, simply by contrast. A woman is careful to choose clothes that 'suit' her particular figure or hair color. Moreover, since most men grow up seeing women dressed and spend their critical periods seeing clothed women, their ideals of beauty include images of clothed women as well as naked ones. 

But the most characteristic feature of fashion, today at least, is its obsession with novelty. We have already seen how Bell thinks this comes about, as the trend-setters try to escape their vulgar imitators. Low thinks the key to women's fashion industry is novelty. 'Any conspicuous display which signals the ability to read fashion trends' is a clue to a woman's status. Being the first in fashion is certainly a status symbol among women. Without the ability to induce constant obsolescence, fashion designers would be a lot less rich than they are.

This brings us back to the shifting sands of cultural standards of beauty. For beauty cannot be commonplace in a monogamous species like man; it must stand out. Men are discriminating because they will get the chance to marry only one, or perhaps two, women, so they are always interested in the best they can get, never in the ordinary. In a crowd of women all wearing black, the single one in red would surely catch the eye of a man, whatever her figure of face was like.

The very word fashion used to mean something between conformity and custom, where now it means novelty and modernity. Remarking on painful corsets and the hypocrisy of low necklines in a puritanical society, Quentin Bell observed: 'The case against the fashion is always a strong one; why is it then that it never results in an effective verdict? Why is is that both public opinion and formal regulations are invariably set at nought, while sartorial custom, which consists in laws that are imposed without formal sanctions, is obeyed with wonderful docility and this despite the fact that its laws are unreasonable, arbitrary and not infrequently cruel.'

I am left feeling that this puzzle is, in the present state of evolutionary and sociological thinking,  insoluble. Fashion is change and obsolescence imposed on a pattern of tyrannical conformity. Fashion is about status and yet the sex that is obsessed with fashion is trying to impress the sex that cares least about status.