# Wix, Squarespace and Webflow

by #InPractise 

Disclaimer: This interview is for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a basis for investment decisions. In Practise is an independent publisher and all opinions expressed by guests are solely their own opinions and do not reflect the opinion of In Practise.

### Tell me about your background pertaining to Wix and Squarespace?

I started my career in finance and private equity but I hated that. That was like my first job out of college and I fell into a consumer tech company that was just launching that got acquired by [[Walmart]] and I left a year after the [[Walmart]] acquisition and then I went to a fashion tech company to lead mobile product there, kind of accidentally. After almost two years there, I went to Squarespace and it so happened that the former Chief Marketing Officer at Jet was on the board of Squarespace.

She and I were getting lunch when I was still at Rent the Runway and she said she was on the board of this company. It was incredible in terms of the margins; they were just printing money but they really wanted to go public and they were having trouble getting the valuation they wanted because they were not growing as fast as they'd like to and you had these other entrants, like Wix, which was much newer and even GoDaddy, which was much larger that had comparable growth.

The CMO and others on the board had convinced the CEO that, rather than putting more money into marketing to try to grow business faster, that they should look at product as a mechanism to grow it and that's what I worked a lot on at Rent the Runway. I went to Squarespace to build out this new practice of growth product. They had, historically, taken a very episodic, big bang approach to software releases where, every year or so, there was a new announcement about the platform upgrade to Squarespace and they would bundle just tons of new features. I think that worked for them in earlier years where they could add some marketing to it and make it a big event.

The problem with it, when I got there, was that they'd been working on the new platform for years and it still wasn't anywhere near ready. From my perspective, the great thing about software is you don't have to do it all at once. For hardware, you do have to get things figured out and then ship it. But in the case of software, you could release new features every week if you wanted to and Squarespace had a large enough user base that you could even experiment with those features and see which ones are worth investing more money into, which had not been part of their like ethos or DNA.

Squarespace was also the oldest company I've ever worked at. It's older than Facebook, it’s older than Myspace even, and if you include the time in Anthony's dorm room, it was 20 something years old. A lot of my work was figuring out how we adapt to a more agile software process and how we start running some experiments and understanding what our users really needed. I think one thing that was also very true about Squarespace, when I got there, is that they were designing the product for a customer whom they had already fully captured. We were really designing a product for folks who cared a lot about design and who lived in Brooklyn and were very into typology and that kind of thing.

The reality was that the largest expansion market was restaurants in Kansas and tattoo parlors in Ohio and folks who didn't have the same design orientation. That’s not to say they didn't care about design, because I do think that was like a big differentiating factor for Squarespace. The websites you make are nicer looking than other platforms, but we would do these kind of esoteric podcasts with famous graphic designers and that just really wasn't penetrating.

We were also over-indexing, at that time, in features to further tweak and customize things to better match the specific design you had in mind. One of the big things that my team learned when I started doing some growth experiments is that's actually way less valuable for a lot of these users than ease of use tools. An incorrect hypothesis, I think, that was dominant at the company at the time was that these folks who are using it have a fully formed vision for their website and they're chipping away at the proverbial marble to create the website. The reality when we talk to people was that the reason they were on Squarespace is because they were not a designer. If they were a designer, they would use something else.

If you're really good at making candles or an amazing chef, your competence is probably not in website design. We were lacking some understanding of the customer. My team led a series of unusually successful experiments that pretty radically increased the conversion rate; mostly middle of the funnel stuff, people who were coming through who were getting started, how to get them started faster and get them past like a ten-minute mark. Ten minutes is a really big kind of make-or-break moment. If you don't survive ten minutes, you're very unlikely to persist into even another session. Most people took at least three sessions to build their website so if you were unlikely to get to that third one, we probably would lose you.

### How did you push to convert before they drop off?

The biggest thing is in template selection, if you choose a template that really doesn't work for your use case, you discover in the first ten minutes that this is going to be way harder than you thought. That's what we would hear over and over from users. What would most often happen is they would pick a template because they liked it aesthetically, but it didn't really fit their use case, so they picked a restaurant template that they identified with, but really, they’re a soap vendor and reforming that template to meet your use case requires more understanding of the Squarespace platform when it's not purpose built for your case.

A lot of the experiments were in what we could do to bias you towards choosing a template that's most likely to work for you; that was the middle of funnel thing. Further up funnel, we also started doing more to structure our understanding of who was coming in. Before, we would ask people to type a couple words about their website and we did some machine learning on that to determine what to recommend to them. Turns out that doesn't really work because two websites that are about coffee could be radically different.

One could be someone who's a competitive barista who does competitions in coffee making, and one could be selling coffee beans, and another could be a travel blogger who tries coffee in different places. We found that users weren't describing the websites in ways that were super helpful, so instead we started asking a series of structured questions such as, what is the topic of your website with a bunch of like pre-suggested things. What use cases do you need for your website; what features do you want on your website?

Then third, which is also really important, how developed is your idea? Did you just come up with this idea or is this, on the other end of the spectrum, a fully formed business with logos and copy and all that other stuff, and you're just putting it onto a website? We learned that those three factors were the most important thing in template selection. How close does it match your desired visual look which is more industry based; two, does it have the features that you're going to need to customize? Three, is there so much content on it that if you tried to customize this it creates a lot more work for you, or do we give you the lightest version that gets you up and running fast and then you can continue to add to it later? Users are really bad at self-selecting on those criteria.

### That makes sense. You mentioned earlier that Squarespace had this software cycle of doing this big bang upgrade and, in Wix, it seems more of a continuous improvement? Is that accurate? Has Squarespace evolved over time to be more like Wix or not?

I think a couple of things are true. One is Wix came into being when the dominant software development life cycle was more agile, so that was baked into their process from the beginning, whereas Squarespace, because it was older, didn't have the same luxury. I do think the culture has changed quite a bit at Squarespace to be more iterative, but one major difference is that Anthony Casalena, the CEO, believes strongly that features need a level of visual polish before they're ready for users. Wix doesn't quite hold themselves to that same standard. Polish is so subjective that things spend a lot more time in review at Squarespace before they actually make it in front of users.

I think there are more misses because they don't have as many rev cycles in experimentation versus Wix. Wix also has a much wider strategy. Wix does smaller things across a much broader range of things to find where there might be traction and then will invest into those but you see much more of a wide spray of ideas and features from Wix than Squarespace will ever do. Squarespace is much more deliberate in new ideas or verticals and they spend a lot of time internally debating ideas before pursuing it; and then once they do pursue it, they throw a lot of resources at it.

### That sounds like Squarespace will be more niche than Wix, and they will focus really hard on the niche that they identify?

The way I might characterize it is that Squarespace has the strongest product market fit with this specific design-oriented community, but there's a little bit of a halo effect that comes with strong product market that go with that community into adjacent users. If you're not a graphic designer but you know that design is important to you, then Squarespace is probably a better option than the competitors. If, however, you don't really care that much about design as a personal entrepreneur, GoDaddy or Wix might be a better choice for you. I think they have a slightly more defensible market position, certainly in terms of marketing, but I wouldn't say that they are trying to limit themselves to the people who are interested in design. I think there is a fundamental belief at Squarespace that everyone should care about design.

### There’s a relatively newer competitor that we hear about, Webflow. Is that something already being talked about? They seem to be doing better than Wix and Squarespace in terms of momentum in signing up.

Their growth is really incredible. In fairness, it's a little bit easier to grow a multimillion-dollar company than a multi-billion-dollar company in terms of year-over-year growth. Webflow is a different market which is a more professional type user. The main difference is Webflow is a really powerful tool, but to use it, you have to learn how it works much more. It’s an investment. The same way if you're using an Adobe product like Photoshop or something like that. If it's your livelihood or if it behooves you, you might take the time to learn how that product works, but it's not intuitive to someone who's sitting down to Photoshop for the first time. There are a lot of weird behaviors that, if you know things about web design or about web development make sense. For example, you can't change one element at a time.

If I change the way a title looks, every title across my webpage is going to change and if you know that, because of CSS, things inherit a style and that's consistent across all instances of that style, then that totally makes sense. If you’re pattern matching on PowerPoint or something, it doesn't make any sense to you, so Webflow is not today designed for the average low sophistication user. It's really designed for someone who wants something more powerful and is willing to take the time to learn how to use it. Because of time investment, it's a better fit for multi-shot players, people who are building multiple websites, not just one.

### Like agencies.

Agencies are like a perfect use case for Webflow because you can design some like very visually stunning things in it but then it's an easy to edit content manage system. For what it's worth, the startup that I'm at now, we’re building our first website in Webflow, despite the fact that I used to work at Squarespace.

### Where does Shopify fit into this mix? If someone’s purely just commerce, do they go to Shopify? How do they compete in this space? Are they a threat to disintermediating website building through Wix or Squarespace?

I think they definitely overlap in the Venn diagram, but the emphasis is different. If you're doing a purely ecommerce use case, Shopify is better because of the tools for ecommerce, but their website builder is half a decade behind Squarespace, Wix or GoDaddy. You cannot easily create a great looking website with Shopify but you can create a serviceable one. What they're really offering solo entrepreneurs is much better tools for inventory management, creating shipping labels, accounting, all of the kind of stuff that, as you start to scale a little bit, become painful. Theirs is a little bit more of an all-in-one ecommerce package solution, whereas Squarespace and Wix are more how you would build your website, but you have to figure out all the other stuff.

### How hard is It for these guys to catch up to Shopify’s lever of ecommerce or is it impossible?

I don't want to say it's completely impossible. I think there's space to serve different consumers. There are some ecommerce folks who are never going to rise to the level of needing inventory management. They make soap at home and they sell 20 units a week or something like that. You don't need sophisticated systems for that and it's actually really complicated to manage those systems. But at least speaking for Squarespace, there was an appetite to shift investment into tools for ecommerce use cases which they would have to do. They'd have to start focusing on ecommerce really aggressively to catch up, and they don't really have brand recognition for ecommerce. They have brand recognition for websites.

Firstly, I think it'd be really hard to catch up to Shopify in terms of the technical investment. Shopify has more engineers than Squarespace by a factor of probably three. Secondly, it's just not aligned with their marketing thesis. What I will say is, during the pandemic, which was an incredible period of growth for all of these companies – Squarespace is no exception – there was a massive uptick in ecommerce use cases because people were having to figure out how to make money without going to their jobs. They were trying to turn their hobby into a business. A lot of things that were offline had to move online because of the pandemic.

We obviously observed that trend quickly and I think that caused a very temporary over rotation onto commerce but it was not a sticky phenomenon. As the pandemic wore on, the share of new websites that were ecommerce focused fell dramatically. They kind of turned the entire company at ecommerce and then realized like, oh, that wasn't such a good idea.

### It sounds like you said Webflow is this professional site who knows what they’re doing and Wix, Squarespace and GoDaddy have focused, historically, on the do-it-yourself guy or girl who needs guidance. Now we hear Wix especially trying to push into this agency service, more of the professional side and we hear that DIY is around 10% of the market and everything else, agency included is 90%. I don’t know your thoughts on that number. If Wix or Squarespace just did DIY really well, will they continue to grow as they have in the past or is it closer to saturation? Two, can they pivot? I know Wix is trying to push into that space through these agencies and I’ve seen mixed reviews.

I think there's always going to be a contingent of agencies building websites for their clients on these easier to use DIY platforms because when people start building a website, they very quickly realize like, this is harder than I thought. Not just in terms of using the tool, but you get confronted with all of these things you hadn't thought about, like I need an about us page, I need to write a mission statement or I need to get product photographs which they didn't have originally, like all of that kind of stuff you realize, this is a steeper hill than I thought. That's not something people are good at doing extemporaneously.

Without giving away the exact percentage, between 20% and 30% of Squarespace business was agency driven, but it’s agencies on behalf of individuals. The reason that I don't think those kinds of agencies will ever become purely Webflow based is that they still have to hand it over to the client to maintain. If I'm a restaurant in Kansas or whatever, I don't have time to learn how to use Webflow to maintain my website probably and it's real easy to screw it up, so I think that will always be a use case.

You’re right that both Wix and Squarespace have tried to tap into that as revenue streams and they've done it a little bit differently. Squarespace did it by trying to use agencies as evangelists for the product so they created this program called Squarespace Circle where, if you are an agency, you pay a nominal fee and you get access to a couple of things but the longer-term vision was, we will send you business. Basically, people who come to our website and say they need professional help, we’ll send them to you and so that would create a virtuous cycle of agencies recommending Squarespace.

Anthony Casalena, the Squarespace CEO, feels strongly that there should not be multiple tools. You should not have a professional version and a consumer version because it muddies the water too much. One thing that I think he was right about is that you would need to dedicate a lot of engineering resources to each of those. A more potentially efficient approach is to have 30% more engineers cover both use cases rather than 100% percent more engineers cover both.

Wix did the opposite and said, we will create an entirely different product for professionals, so they created Editor X which is meant to be a Webflow competitor. The problem with it is that it has the same issue as Webflow in that if you build a site in Editor X, you have to maintain it in Editor X. It's not great to hand over to a client really. It's not as though they're getting the ease of the normal Wix product. There's still learning curve that comes with the more complicated thing, but what they could start to do – and I don't think this has actually given them a lot of traction but I suspect there were internal conversations where they were optimistic about this – is have a showcase of beautifully built websites that were built with Wix.

You started to get more creative looking websites that were branded as Wix sites that were made with Editor X. In truth, you probably could not make that same website with their normal consumer editor, but from the outside it’s like, oh Wix, you can do all kinds of great things in it. It maybe gave them a little bit more cultural cache to compete with Squarespace in terms of beautiful websites coming out of it.

One thing that I think people at these companies radically overestimate is how much consumers know how the websites they visit are built. Internally, we can look at a site and know this is probably a Squarespace site. I can look at the code and know immediately that this was a Squarespace site. The restaurant owner in Kansas will never do that and will probably never even see what examples of Wix sites or Squarespace sites are beyond looking at the templates. The templates are really your best preview about what the site could end up looking like. I don't know that the strategy of trying to create a halo effect with cool looking Wix sites actually does that much.

On the flip side, Squarespace invested a ton in winning Webby awards on various sites that we built. It would shock me if that drove a lot of tailwinds with consumers. “Oh, they’ve gotten the most Webbys. They must be the best.”

### Even more than the halo effect, what I’m trying to understand is if Editor X is actually good enough to make a dent into Webflow, get some piece of that market.

I don't think so. There are a couple of reasons. Webflow is much more popular in the community. They have much better penetration. Webflow is invested a lot in that community, in terms of both education tools to help people learn how to use it more, which is like a content play. It's called like Webflow University or something. It’s a massive content investment that I don't think Wix can easily catch up to unless they put a lot of resources behind. Secondly, I think there's a reasonable question about whether Wix will continue to support Editor X and add new features and that kind of thing, because it's perceived as an experiment. Today, it might work great, but if they abandon it in two years, it's kind of a wasted investment.

I don't believe that that the same impression is given by Webflow of it might not be here to stay. Because it has that investment dynamic of, I have to spend time to learn how to use this well, I think it creates more pressure to pick the one that you think is going to be around the longest. Editor X doesn't give that impression and they're certainly not putting enough resources behind it because it's probably not profitable enough to do. It's like a power player in the market. It's kind of an also ran. It works for professionals, it's not great and unless you have some specific tie to Wix, I can't imagine as a professional why you would choose Editor X over Webflow. Maybe pricing, but it's actually not that much cheaper than the basic Webflow packages.

### Wix recently have shown quite a good amount of growth through the partners which, if what you’re saying is true, it would be the partners using it for more the do-it-yourself type of guys who they’re using, as opposed to a professional Editor X type of website?

Not having seen any of their internals, I would strongly guess that to be the case. Wix also made investments in agencies. I kind of wish we did this at Squarespace; they started targeting professionals in ads directly. They were running Facebook, Instagram and LinkedIn campaigns targeting professional website designers with great content such as, here's the latest report on agency billing practices, or here's some trends that your prospective customers might want to know. They started courting that market directly. They had much more of a push approach to reaching that audience where Squarespace has, historically, taken more of a pull approach of, we are the cool one, become part of our community, on your own volition come to us. I don't think it would occur to Squarespace to spend performance marketing dollars on acquiring agencies because, in fairness, it's very hard to attribute those dollars.

### Coming back to that market side I briefly touched upon, do-it-yourself was roughly 10%. Do you have a sense of where those numbers lie? Related to that the bigger question, can Wix and Squarespace sustain without going upmarket? As you said, it seems tough but they are in the space where people who don’t really know how to code, they help that person as opposed to the professional. Can they keep going? Is it big enough?

My personal editorial opinion is no, in terms of growth, and I think it's true on both ends. Squarespace invested very heavily in trying to capture an enterprise market, building a version of Squarespace for enterprise use cases. On paper, it sounds as if you could empower a marketing org to create a bunch of great landing pages and run their own campaigns and, that way, the engineers at Lyft or Pixar or whoever it is don't have to intervene anytime marketing wants to do something. The problem is, Squarespace isn't great for what enterprises need, like billing and sign in for login and security and all of that stuff; it just wasn't built for that.

It was always an exercise of building features in order to win contracts but the contracts were not very sustainable because we would win the contract and then the company would realize, this actually isn't as good as we thought it would be. It sounds good, but it doesn't actually fit our use case as well as we thought. We had a couple of successful examples of real estate brokerages that wanted to give all of their agents their own website and so they would pay in bulk for 100 or 200 websites and they'd all use the same custom template.

### That’s repeatable, yes.

Yes. It fell down in that agents aren't great at using the tools, either. The tools sound easier to use than they are. Secondly, the systems for billing and login and that kind of thing needed massive re-architecture changes to fully support and it was going to be a really big effort for very uncertain payoff. Plus, it shifts the org to being really business development driven rather than product led growth driven and that just was not a competence that Squarespace had of salespeople.

I don't think there's a great expansion opportunity upmarket in terms of enterprise or even agencies really. I don't think this is true in the short term, but in the medium term and long term, even down market, I think websites will lose out to platforms like pure play platforms. We were seeing this already where a lot of people were starting their business with Instagram rather than a website or they were starting a newsletter on Substack or writing on Medium rather than going to a website. They would evolve, potentially, into a website, but they didn't start there.

The reason for that is it’s really hard to get discovered by just having a website. Ten years ago, you probably could get some traction with SEO and Google. Today, the internet's so saturated that if I build a website tomorrow on Barry’s Custom Coffee or something, the likelihood that someone would find it from Google is very low. You need one of these platforms that have discovery mechanisms built into it to gain an audience and I'm seeing more and more of those getting traction, like Gumroad or, on the adult content side, Only Fans blew up. I think those are also easier to use and they focus much more on what the entrepreneur is good at and less on the stuff that they're probably not good at which is building, maintaining and designing a website.

If you're a great writer, on Medium, you just focus on writing. You don't also have to think about the rest of the stuff. I think those are going to win more. The downside, of course, as an entrepreneur, is that you get locked into that ecosystem and you're stuck with whatever Gumroad gives you and the cut that they might take and all of that kind of thing. I think there’re are opportunities in new people getting started and I think that, in the future, more people are going to get started on one of these platforms.

Squarespace tried to get into that market with the acquisition of Unfold, which was an Instagram tool, believing that that would be their entrée into a mobile first, platform first starting point. The problem with that was that Unfold was really leveraging a fad of people adding frames and customization to their Instagram stories. That was a cool trend but it was short lived and I think it also is very platform dependent. TikTok really displaced a lot of that and Squarespace never really figured out how to turn those people into future Squarespace customers. There was a lot of talk about building your personal brand and then needing a website for that personal brand, but the people who were spending $2 a month on Unfold Plus were very unlikely to then make a several hundred-dollar investment in their website.

There wasn't actually a lot of market synergy there. It’s easy to talk about all of these people that, as they grow up, are going to want a website, but that was never really true and the founder of Unfold was very resistant and is still very resistant to integrating more broadly with Squarespace. I never really saw that. Where I think Wix is smart is going deeper on certain verticals, so when they acquired SpeedETab and started really investing in a restaurant vertical and giving restaurants tools to do point of sale, to do delivery partnerships and that kind of stuff, that made them an incredible player in the space.

### Today they signed up with DoorDash.

Yes. That kind of stuff I think is smart. I don't know how Wix is getting market penetration or brand awareness in terms of restaurateurs because I think that's another big stumbling block. Interestingly, around the same time Wix acquired SpeedETab, Squarespace acquired Tock which is a restaurant booking platform. They were very slow to integrate Tock. The executive team at Tock is very opinionated. I think they see themselves as a bigger company than they actually are and the main problem with Tock, at least from my perspective as head of growth product at Squarespace, was that they really only have a great product market fit for super luxury restaurants that are hard to get into like Alinea or Per Se or whatever.

There’s a finite number of those and they have like 60% or 70% saturation with them. The way they got so saturated with them was that the co-founder of Tock was a chef at Alinea and he got all of his friends on the platform and they were basically giving it away for free to the highest profile customers, hoping that that would create a halo effect for other restaurants. The problem was, other restaurants don't have the same problem where more people want reservations than they can give and the idea of prepaying for your meal at Appleby’s or something is crazy, so they never really got past that and their revenue was all radically out of sync with their number of customers. They’d given away so much. They were growing but if each customer was actually paying their full freight, they'd be much larger for a company of their status.

### What was Squarespace’s rationale for doing that then? Was it not a well thought out acquisition?

Part of it, I think, was the vanity play and we will have the best restaurant booking platform as part of the Squarespace ecosystem. To back up a little bit, with Squarespace's acquisition strategy, that started maybe six months into my time there. Basically, the thesis was, we're making so much money here that we don't know where to put it. It was becoming inefficient to funnel it back into marketing dollars because the tax was getting high, so they wanted to we start to diversify the way they were spending this free cashflow? At the time, the game was, how do we show high growth in order to go public?

They started thinking about how to use this excess cash to acquire high growth companies, high growth potential companies to create a blended growth story to go public. The first one they acquired was one called Acuity Scheduling, which was like a Calendly competitor. That one was an unusually good deal because the founder did not negotiate very hard. He ended up becoming my boss at one point. He didn't really negotiate very hard and he took a very realistic multiple on revenue. That was a cheap acquisition that actually made a lot of money. It was profitable, then they acquired Unfold and kind of the opposite was true. The two co-founders of Unfold actually had the firm who represented Instagram in the Facebook acquisition negotiate for them.

It was a very expensive acquisition for a very unprofitable company, but was cool. This is making us credible with Gen Z or whatever. Then there was another acquisition called Videolicious which was just a complete flop but it was part of an investment thesis that we needed something in the video space, that was a rapidly growing thing. That didn't really go anywhere but I think it was quite cheap. Then the last one was Tock where it was a bit of a vanity play. It was also about the fact that restaurants could be an important vertical for us; how might we do that? The third thing that I think was good in a slide deck but didn't actually come into fruition was the idea that booking time might be like a major way people transact online in the future and Tock was starting to see traction with venues adjacent to restaurants that, mostly because of the pandemic, needed people to like book ahead of time and they had limits on how many people they could take.

The flagship use case for that kind of expansion opportunity with Tock was vineyards where, if you wanted to go do like a wine tasting tour or something, you would have to book ahead of time and they have a hard cap on the number of people who could do it and, especially because of Covid, those caps were pretty small and the vineyard needed a good way of keeping track of who's coming when and all of that stuff. Tock provided them a way to do it and there was this conversation about how that model might get applied to a lot of things and Tock might become the platform for booking experiences. That didn't really play out and, as the pandemic became less dominant in our lives, that thesis kind of failed. Not only was that that product less needed but also there were other better tools for that on the market than trying to make this restaurant booking platform work for these alternate event use cases.

### Wix reported some numbers but what I’m seeing is CACs have gone up recently and LTV, they looked good if you assume a relatively high retention rate, but what’s your take on what you think about that.

This is another short-lived phenomenon of the pandemic. At the height of things in 2020-2021, a disproportionate number of new users were commerce cases. They were selling stuff online. Those are more expensive plans so the ARPU was way higher on those users. That brought our average LTV up substantially. Historically, those were also the most expensive users to acquire and they started coming to us instead of us having to go get them. You got LTV increasing and you got CACs coming down. The problem was, no one knew how that cohort was actually going to retain. All of the models assumed that they would behave like existing commerce cohorts and commerce cohorts actually do retain less than others because it's easier to outgrow the platform.

If you're too good at selling stuff, you then go to Shopify or if your restaurant grows to need more integrated booking or whatever, you’ll need Squarespace for that, but we booked a lot more revenue per user on that. I think if you look at it year-over-year or in comparison from 2020 onwards, rising CACs are a function of a more competitive space and paid marketing and performance marketing for websites. Secondly, massive channel saturation. All the places that you can advertise websites now have massive competition. Squarespace was early on podcast ads, but now you can't listen to a podcast that doesn't have an ad for Wix, Shopify or Squarespace and that's brought the costs up pretty dramatically.

The third thing is that we're smarter about actual retention curves and it turns out the highest ARPU users that were acquired during the pandemic are also the most likely to churn into year two and year three. Looking at it on an average and multi-year amortized basis, the LTVs are dropping because you’re losing the best cohorts or the highest ARPU mix of the cohorts.

The other thing is, in their earnings reports, Wix used to give a really cloudy definition of new user acquisition because it included free websites and so they would report on overall new users and then premium users, people who were paying. It’s easy to show high growth in free stuff and it's harder to show growth in paid, but we thought the free offering was kind of dumb. We tried it and rarely did those people convert to paid users.

What we learned, in hindsight, is that the free thing has a very different effect, in that you probably won't turn that website into a paid website, but you might learn how to use the platform so later, when you do want a paid website, you already know how to use it and you're more likely to convert the next time. But if you look at it on just a website-by-website basis, the free offering doesn't actually do that much for you.

What else about CAC? I think the same thing about platforms is true that before direct response, growth teams were competing against each other. Wix was competing against GoDaddy who was competing against the lesser players.

### Another new Medium.

Yes. Now you're competing against Gumroad, you're competing against TikTok. The shape has changed and it makes things more expensive. It's much cheaper to run very targeted ads that are for a restaurant or for whatever. The more niche you are, the more cost effective the ads are. I think that's starting to chip away at the broader market that these pure play website offerings have.

### If you have that view and what you’re saying is true, then long term, you won’t be bullish on this space generally, right? Their outcome would be that they’re tougher to grow and a smaller market than initially thought.

I think the product philosophy at Wix is more likely to be successful than the product philosophy at Squarespace. I think Wix’s attempts to diversify and experiment will keep them relevant longer than Squarespace’s idea of, let’s guess at what people want and spend a lot of time working on it. I'm not super bullish on the pure DIY website building space. I think it's probably got another 10 years of websites being a thing and then I think the platform risk is really high. I think there will always however be a place for Shopify to grow because it's really the only credible competition to Amazon in ecommerce and, from a brand perspective, being on Amazon sucks. You have no power.

You're constantly at risk of Amazon ripping you off once they see data that shows you have a lot of traction. 70% of all ecommerce start searches start with the Amazon box so they're always going to win there and your only way to fight back, as a brand, is to develop direct consumer relationships and create loyalty which you can’t really do well without fully owning the channel. I'm not a big retail investor but in my personal portfolio I have Shopify. I don't have any other website builder.

### I’ve noticed that Wix’s gross margin has fallen more recently and, even if you look at creative subscriptions which is equal into Squarespace’s core offering, that’s at 77% right now and Squarespace has always been at a higher level. It just seems to be a much higher gross margin business. Why is that? I’ve been surprised to see that difference between the two?

They don't report margins by line item. You're talking about overall gross margin.

### I am, but they also break out into core, repeating, hosting website business of 77% right now and then the add-on stuff, like payments, is much lower, at 25%. Even looking at the core stuff, Squarespace is higher than that even though that number of 85% also includes all the add-on stuff. I don’t know if you have any thoughts on why.

My best guess as to why margins might look lower at Wix is that they are more open to experiment with low margin offerings, so their overall mix brings the average margins down. But those might be investments that pay off later. I think the risk that Squarespace has with trying to maintain high FCF and very high margin is that it blunts investment into new stuff that might initially be low margin.

My best guess is that it has more to do with the mix of offerings outside of the core because you you're right, those creative subscriptions and core is crazy at 90%. Adding server space is negligible but I think the remainder being just a higher mix and inside of that 27% or whatever it is for Wix that isn't the core product, I think there's a really big mix of low margin stuff there.

The equivalent at Squarespace is with Unfold subscriptions or with any of the acquisitions, with the exception of Acuity and Tock. The more users you acquire on that platform, the worse the overall margins for the business get because the margins on Unfold are negative, but that's a much smaller part of the business than the equivalent at Wix. Wix has a million things going at any given time, in terms of various experiments. They've got an app for communities. They've got all of this other stuff, so I would guess that's contributing to it. I don't think there are any structural reasons why the COGS would be higher for Wix or Squarespace. It's not as though Squarespace has unlocked some efficiency in scaling that no one else has.

### I hear a lot about Wix having a bad reputation in the professional side, that it’s not a great tool. Brand plays a role in getting picked up. Is that true and did you come across that, because it felt like they’re trying to correct for that.

I think the perception is definitely there but I think a lot of that has to do with the way Wix marketed. They used very approachable people; famously for a while. Their spokesperson was Karlie Kloss who was an attractive female model and Wix has always had higher name recall in the middle of the country versus Squarespace had higher name recall in coastal areas. I think that's kind of a vestige of the way they marketed and the niche they were trying to capture. I actually think their tools have improved a lot and they're not really that inferior. I will say Wix has more features that are a bit do-it-for-me, that are automagical things. You put in a theme and it will spit out a bunch of pictures for you or whatever.

If you're professional, that feels kind of infantilizing. It’s not value added, but it's potentially more useful for a DIY user. If you're professional, there's more to ignore about Wix than there is in Squarespace, there's more unnecessary stuff. But I think the tools have come a long way.

One thing I will say though is, rather than sunsetting old versions of their platform, Wix has a strategy where they offer them alongside each other. There's the old Wix editor which you can still use. It used to be called Project Dolphin or something, I don't know what it's called now, but the editor that does a lot of stuff for you; and then they have Editor X on the other side. They’re more willing to have different products for different people. The challenge with that is it's very hard to market all of those products to the right segments and people really only recall the brand name. They don't recall Editor X and whatever.

### There’s a huge existing market on WordPress and Wix sells a much better overall security wise package. What’s your view on that piece? They could survive just taking market share from moving people from WordPress?

Maybe, but the switching costs are really high and people underestimate that. Rebuilding your website in another platform is expensive and the reason that WordPress has all these security issues is because it's infinitely customizable with plugins. Each of those plugins has potential security vulnerabilities and they’re a pain in the ass to update, but the reason people use those plugins is because they want niche functionality. They want some weird tweak kind of thing or they need a specific tool in their website and you lose those with Squarespace. You gain the lack of having to maintain plugins. On the other side there's only the ones that come with the platform. I think it's not a great replacement in that way.

### For new guys would you still pick WordPress? I guess it depends what type of user you are.

I would not start a website on WordPress, but a lot of agencies, because of this invest in bias problem, recommend WordPress because they're experts in it and because you get hooked on their expertise because there's so much wonky stuff with WordPress. I think there's always going to be a future of agencies pushing WordPress onto people because there's just a lot of expertise in using it, it's a quasi-proprietary expertise and there's such a rich community of tweaks and plugins and stuff. It is a pain in the ass to maintain, but you don't notice that until later. You don't notice that until you're in year two that it's like, oh God, there's all these plugins that are at different states to being updated. If I update this one it will break something else. You notice that later.

I don't think WordPress is going to win. I wouldn't put money on the expansion of WordPress, but I think it's here to stay for the foreseeable future, in terms of wordpress.org. Wordpress.com which is their self-hosted choice I don't see being a major winner in the space. They're not investing enough in the marketing and that kind of thing.