# Zimbabwe as an example of a Second Investment Model

We have begun making some investments in Zimbabwe. The investment case relies upon extreme undervaluation compared to normalized values, so much so that a wait of ten years for normalization would still yield wonderful results.

It makes little sense to discuss stocks we may or are buying (Costco is likely to be a rare exception in this regard) but I can illustrate the investment case by describing Zimcem. This is the country's largest cement producer (after the local division of Pretoria Portland Cement), with around 700'000 tons of cement capacity and a replacement cost of around $70 to $100 million. The firm has no debt and business conditions are awful (general inflation exceeds cement price inflation and product demand is low) but the company is priced on the Harare stock exchange at one seventieth(1/70th!)  of its replacement cost.

Why is this relevant? So far, we have only discussed one model we use to pick good investments which we call [[Scale Economics Shared]] as evidenced by Costco(and to a lesser extent Amazon.com). We have little more than a handful of distinct investment models, which overlap to some extent, and Zimcem is a good example of a second model namely, "deep discount to replacement cost with latent pricing power". Indeed these two models combined can be used to describe around 45% of total Partnership assets. it was this model that led to many investments during the Asian crisis (such as Siam Cement which has risen twenty-fold from the trough in eight years) and to neighboring South Africa where Pretoria Portland Cement could be bought at a price of $20 per ton of capacity in 1998 and is now valued at $180 per ton.

The model is premised upon the observation that the business needs to replace its assets and will require prices which 1. fund the capex, and 2. economically justify the spending. Either that or Zimbabwe will have to go without cement or import from abroad (tricky for this land locked country). In any event, provided discretionary capital is not invested to exacerbate the situation, the supply side remains muted (industry capex is zero) and the business is not nationalized, then the shares ought to do well, in times.

This last point, along with other confiscation events, does not have a zero probability, and is the main reason our investments in the country will be modest in size. Even if we were able to secure all the shares we desire (which we seem incapable of doing) it is unlikely that the total investment would be much more than a few percent of the Partnership assets at cost. There is no a priori reason why Zimbabwean businesses should not trade at a premium to replacement cost following recovery in the economy after years of mismanagement. In Zimbabwe this may require "regime change", or even regime changes. Perhaps the investment case rests in your manager being fifty years younger than Bob Mugabe.