# 2021-05-24
1. What topic am I currently focusing on?
	1. Human relationships
2.  What did I learn today?
	1.  If I want to be liked by people, I shall be genuinely be interested in them, smile, remember their name, be a good listener, talk in terms of their interests and make them feel important.
	2.  If I want to convince people, I shall never get into an argument, show respect for the other person's ideas, admit when I am wrong, be friendly, let the other person do most of the talking, get the other person to say Yes, Yes, as soon as possible, let the other person think that the idea is his or her, be sympathetic with the other person's situation, and appeal to nobler reasons.   See[[How to win friends and Influence People]]
	3.  Our future is shaped by our behavior, i.e the actions we repeatedly do. Those actions originate from decisions, which should be viewed more as a commitment than a wish. I should make decisions/commitments often, in particular regarding:
		1.  What I should focus on.
		2.  What things mean to me.
		3.  Which actions I shall take to create the results I desire. See [[Decisions -  The Pathway to Power]]
	4.  Relationships issues can come from two sources: either not knowing the human nature, or failing to act in accordance to human nature (i.e an intention-execution gap). [[Need to Improve Your Relations with Others - Start with Getting Human Nature Right]]




*"My happiness and sense of worth depend to no small extent upon my skill in dealing with people"*

