# 2020-06-05

I've been reading [[Yen Liow]] and [[The Art of Learning | Josh Waitzkin]] this week, and those two made me think a lot. I already knew that the topic I am coming back to again and again is equity investing, and I want to become a craftsman of investing.

Liow and Waitzkin are intense competitors and highlight that continuous learning and growth are a pre-requisite. (see [[Become a learning machine]]). It follows that learning should be deeply embedded in my life and I need to make plan to structure my life around learning.

Learning should be done for the sake of it, not because I want to make money. If I can deeply own the process and become a true craftsman, then the outcome will take care of itself.

But it follows that I should plan daily for [[Deliberate Practice]] (see also [[The Definitive Guide to Deliberate Practice]]). 

Deliberate practice cannot be done without focus and I should train my focus. This can be done both with meditation and interval training (focus cannot be sustained indefinitely, and the body needs recovery between intense sessions of focus).


The goal of deliberate practice should be to deconstruct reality to understand the fundamentals very well and master them. Once the essence of the craft is internalized, the craftsman can use the fundamentals to create new insights fitting his personality.


I was also re-reading [[The days are long but the decades are short]] by Sam Altman, and what stroke me was that I should be fierce in getting rid of the distractions in my life. Humans are bad at it and always attracted by the new shiny thing. How can I focus at my craft? I need to improve my environment, especially internet.


